Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Energy Conversion and Management 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/enconman 

Techno-economic evaluation of hydrogen and ammonia as energy carriers 
in a multi-generation system 

Du Wen a,b,*, Shicheng Liu c, Zhiyuan Ning c, Muhammad Aziz b, * 
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan 
b Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan 
c State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Carbon neutrality 
Energy storage 
Hydrogen and ammonia 
Optimal planning 

Green hydrogen is suitable for grid-scale energy storage to increase the penetration of renewable energy, and it is 
also  an alternative to fossil fuels. However, it still suffers from storage problems owing to its low volumetric 
energy density, embrittlement, and very low boiling point. To improve safety and reduce cost, green ammonia 
has been proposed as a substitute for hydrogen and has attracted considerable attention. In this study, a multi- 
generation system was proposed to compare green hydrogen and green ammonia as energy carriers. Four sce-
narios are discussed and the performances under different energy carriers, constant and time-of-use electricity 
prices, and on-grid and off-grid operations are compared. The optimal planning of the system was formulated as a 
mixed-integer linear programming problem and was evaluated using supply and demand profiles hourly over a 
year. The objective was to maximize profitability, which is reflected by the cumulative cash position and payback 
period. The results revealed that the hydrogen-based system was superior to the ammonia-based system. In the 
hydrogen-based scenario, the cumulative cash position was 83.43 MUSD and the payback period was 14 years. 
The cumulative cash position and payback period were 12.78 MUSD and 22 years, respectively, in the ammonia- 
based  scenario.  To  improve  profitability,  it  is  recommended  to  increase  the  capacity  for  hydrogen/ammonia 
production and reduce the capacity for backup power generation.   

1. Introduction 

Since signing the Paris Agreement in 2016, several countries have 
included carbon neutrality on the agenda, pledged to achieve it by 2050, 
and proposed relevant policies, regulations, and schemes. Currently, the 
efforts are focused on the energy sector, which contributes to the highest 
carbon emissions. Promoting further electrification and expanding the 
penetration  of  renewable  energy  have  been  identified  as  the  most 
promising solutions for achieving low-carbon emissions in the energy 
sector.  However,  the  intermittent  nature  of  renewable  energy  is  the 
main difficulty faced by grids that are not designed for renewable en-
ergy. Energy storage technologies have attracted considerable attention 
as a solution to this problem; however, not all of them are suitable for 
grids  in  terms  of  technical  and  economic  aspects.  Green  hydrogen  is 

suitable for bulk energy storage because of its high gravimetric energy 
density,  favorable  cradle-to-grave  characteristics,  and  lack  of  carbon 
emissions during power generation [1]. In addition to energy storage, it 
has versatile applications. For example, it can replace coke as a reducing 
agent  in  the  iron  industry;  it  is  an  important  feedstock  in  chemical 
production and a clean fuel. Moreover, the existing natural gas infra-
structure is compatible with hydrogen and hence requires less invest-
ment for upgrading. Considering the global energy crisis and depletion 
of fossil fuel reservoirs, alternative fuels are urgently required to ensure 
energy  security,  as  the  predictions  from  different  institutes  have 
revealed that the production of oil is approaching or has already reached 
its peak. Therefore, researchers have envisioned a hydrogen economy 
[2] in which green hydrogen, produced using water electrolysis based 
on renewable energy, is not only used in the electricity and heat sectors 
but also in the industry and transportation sectors, which are difficult to 

Abbreviations: AS, Ammonia synthesis; CAPEX, Capital expenditure; CCP, Cumulative cash position; EMS, Energy management system; MILP, Mixed integer linear 
programming; MUSD, Million U.S. dollar; OPEX, Operational expenditure; PBP, Payback period; PV, Solar photovoltaic; SoC, State of charge; SOEL, Solid oxide water 
electrolysis; SOFC, Solid oxide fuel cell; SOFCA, Ammonia based SOFC; SOFCH, Hydrogen based SOFC; STA, Ammonia storage tank; STH, Hydrogen storage tank; 
WT, wind turbine. 

* Corresponding authors. 

E-mail addresses: wendu@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp (D. Wen), maziz@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp (M. Aziz).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2023.116670 
Received 8 July 2022; Received in revised form 5 January 2023; Accepted 6 January 2023   

EnergyConversionandManagement277(2023)116670Availableonline12January20230196-8904/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.D. Wen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Nomenclature 

electricity price at time t, (USD) 
hydrogen price, (USD) 
annual depreciation cost, (USD) 
annual interest rate, (%) 

Symbols 
CAPEX  CAPEX of the system, (USD) 
Cbyproduct  price of byproduct, (USD) 
Ct
ele 
CH2 
dj 
i 
MH2,max  maximum capacities of the hydrogen storage tank, (t) 
MH2,min  minimum capacities of the hydrogen storage tank, (t) 
mt
mt
mt
mt
˙mH2,SOEL  hydrogen production rate of SOEL in the simulation, 

byproduct  net production rate of byproduct, (kg⋅h
net production rate of hydrogen, (kg⋅h
amount of hydrogen loss, (kg⋅h
H2,loss 
H2,SOEL  hydrogen production rate of SOEL, (kg⋅h

(cid:0) 1) 
(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

H2 

(kg⋅h

(cid:0) 1) 

H2,SOFC  hydrogen consumption rate of SOFC, (kg⋅h

mt
˙mH2,SOFC  hydrogen consumption rate of SOFC in the simulation, 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

(kg⋅h
amount of hydrogen sold to the market, (kg⋅h
amount of hydrogen storage at time t, (kg⋅h
amount of hydrogen storage at time t-1, (kg⋅h
net production rate of ammonia, (kg⋅h
installed number of solar cells, (–) 
number of wind turbines, (–) 
system lifetime, (y) 
annual OPEX of the system, (USD) 
OPEX at time t, (USD) 
OPEX of the energy storage system, (USD) 
OPEX of the hydrogen storage system, (USD) 
OPEX of the renewable farm, (USD) 
output power of ammonia synthesis, (kW) 

H2,sold 

H2,sto 

H2,sto 

mt
mt
mt(cid:0) 1
mt
NH3 
NPV 
NWT 
n 
OPEX 
OPEXt 
opext
es 
opext
hs 
opext
rf 
Pt
AS 

input power of the ammonia storage system, (kW) 
input or output power of the battery, (kW) 
rated power of the battery, (kW) 
output power of compression, (kW) 

output power of compression in the simulation, (kW) 
output power of a solar cell, (kW) 
rated power of a solar cell, (kW) 
curtailment of renewable energy, (kW) 
electricity demand, (kW) 
input or output power of the energy storage system, (kW) 
imported electricity from the grid, (kW) 

Pt
as 
Pt
B 
PB,rated 
Pt
C 
˙
PC 
Pt
cell 
Pcell,rated 
Pt
cur 
Pt
demand 
Pt
es 
Pt
g 
Pt
hs 
Pt
PV 
Pt
rf 
Pt
SOEL 
˙
PSOEL 
PSOEL,rated
Pt
SOFC 
˙
PSOFC 
PSOFC,rated
Pt
turbine 
Pt
WT 
PWT,rated 
REV 
REVt 
SoCmax  maximum SoC, (–) 
SoCmin  minimum SoC, (–) 
SoCt 
t 
v 
xSOEL 
xSOFC 

SoC of the battery, (–) 
tax rate, (%) 
(cid:0) 1) 
wind speed, (m⋅s
binary variable, (–) 
binary variable, (–)  

power of the hydrogen storage system 
power of PVs, (kW) 
power of the renewable farm, (kW) 
power of SOEL, (kW) 

power of SOEL in the simulation, (kW) 
rated power of SOEL, (kW) 
power of SOFC, (kW) 

power of SOFC in the simulation, (kW) 
rated power of SOFC, (kW) 
power of a wind turbine, (kW) 
power of wind turbines, (kW) 
rated power of a wind turbine, (kW) 
annual revenue of the system, (USD) 
revenue at time t, (USD) 

electrify and decarbonize. Thus, green hydrogen exhibits a cross-sector 
decarbonization  potential.  Several  studies  have  been  conducted  on 
green  hydrogen  production  [3],  storage  [4],  and  utilization  [5]  to 
progress towards a hydrogen-based economy. 

However, hydrogen storage has some limitations in terms of cost and 
safety. Greater space and larger devices are required to achieve a lower 
volumetric  energy  density  for  the  same  unit  of  energy  stored,  which 
results  in  a  cost  penalty.  It  necessitates  investments  on  safety  pre-
cautions  because  the  high  flammability  of  hydrogen  expedites  its 
deflagration,  and  detecting  the  nearly  invisible  and  smoke-free 
hydrogen  flames  is  difficult.  To  counter  the  low  volumetric  density, 
high flammability, and energy loss of hydrogen storage [6], researchers 
have proposed other renewable synthetic fuels, such as ammonia [7], to 
replace  hydrogen  as  an  energy  carrier.  Ammonia  has  a  high  energy 
density  and  hydrogen  content  and  is  a  zero-carbon  fuel.  It  is  also  an 
important  chemical  widely  used  in  fertilizers,  acid  gas  removal,  re-
frigerants,  synthetic  fibers,  and  explosives  [8].  To  use  ammonia  as  a 
more efficient energy carrier, researchers have investigated ammonia- 
to-power  technologies  using  electrochemical  and  thermochemical 
methods, including fuel cells [9], internal combustion engines [10], and 
gas  turbines  [11].  According  to  a  report  [12],  ammonia  is  a  cost- 
competitive fuel for heavy mining trucks and container ships. 

Considering the advantages of green hydrogen/ammonia in attaining 
a low-carbon environment, particularly its cross-sector decarbonization 
potential,  various  multi-generation  systems  that  use  green  hydrogen/ 
ammonia  as  the  energy  carrier  have  been  proposed  and  discussed  in 
various  studies.  Thermodynamic  analyses  have  been  conducted  on 

various hydrogen- and ammonia-based systems, which involve different 
green  hydrogen/ammonia  production,  storage,  and  utilization  tech-
niques.  Lutman  et  al.  [13]  proposed  a  sustainable  multi-generation 
system  based  on  solar  and  wind  energy,  which  provides  electricity, 
heating, cooling, and water desalination for remote areas. Both thermal 
energy  and  hydrogen  storage  units  (water  electrolysis  and  hydrogen 
combustor) were used to ensure continuous operation. The overall en-
ergy and exergy efficiencies were 50 % and 34 %, respectively. In [14], 
green  hydrogen  was  directly  used  for  ammonia  synthesis  (AS)  in  an 
ammonia-based system without storage, and ammonia-fed solid oxide 
fuel cells (SOFCs) were used to compensate for any electricity shortage. 
The system performance was evaluated hourly for a year via a dynamic 
simulation.  The  overall  energy  efficiency  varied  between  46.1  %  and 
53.3 %, whereas the overall exergy efficiency varied between 34 % and 
41.5  %.  Other  studies  have  proposed  multi-generation  systems  with 
different  renewable  energy  sources  [15],  green  hydrogen  production 
methods  [16],  hydrogen[16]/ammonia[17]  utilization  methods,  and 
system integration [18]. All of the studies mentioned above prove the 
technical feasibility of hydrogen- and ammonia-based systems. 

A techno-economic analysis of a system using hydrogen or ammonia 
as energy carriers was conducted. Anand et al. [19] conducted a case 
study on an academic research building. A standalone hybrid renewable 
energy system equipped with hydrogen fuel cells and a battery bank was 
proposed to achieve 100 % renewable energy penetration at a cost of 
(cid:0) 1. A case study conducted on a university campus [20] 
0.203 USD⋅kWh
investigated a grid-connected hybrid system consisting of photovoltaic 
(PV)  cells,  gas-fired  trigeneration,  and  hydrogen  production.  The 

EnergyConversionandManagement277(2023)1166702