Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rser 

Environmental impact of renewable energy source based electrical power 
plants: Solar, wind, hydroelectric, biomass, geothermal, tidal, ocean, 
and osmotic 

Abidur Rahman a, Omar Farrok a,*, Md Mejbaul Haque b,c 
a Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Ahsanullah University of Science and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
b Research School of Engineering, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 2601, Australia 
c School of Engineering and Technology, Central Queensland University, Rockhampton, QLD, 4701, Australia   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Biomass 
Energy 
Environmental impact 
Geothermal 
Hydroelectric 
Ocean energy 
Renewable energy source 
Solar energy 
Tidal energy 
Wind energy 

1. Introduction 

Renewable energy source (RES) based electrical power plants are widely considered green and clean due to their 
contribution  to  decarbonizing  the  energy  sectors.  It  is  apparent  that  RESs  do  not  produce  carbon  dioxide, 
however  their  significant negative  impacts on the  environment are still  found  and cannot be  ignored.  In this 
paper,  the  environmental  impacts  of  RES  based  power  plants  are  analyzed  through  a  comprehensive  review 
considering  solar  thermal,  solar  photovoltaic,  wind,  biomass,  geothermal,  hydroelectric,  tidal,  ocean  current, 
oceanic  wave,  ocean  thermal,  and  osmotic  effects.  Solar  thermal  power  is  well  known  as  concentrated  solar 
power. A strength, weakness, opportunity, and threat (SWOT) analysis is carried out and discussed for all RES 
based power plants. Comparative SWOT analyses for solar photovoltaic and concentrated solar power plants are 
presented. The comparative environmental impact analyses for all existing RES based power plants are tabulated 
for various attributes. These attributes include but are not limited to human health, noise, pollution, greenhouse 
gas emission, ozone layer depletion, toxification, flooding, impact on inhabitants, eutrophication, dried up rivers, 
and deforestation. Based on the analysis, it is found that careful selection of RES for electrical power plants is 
necessary because improper utilization of RES could be very harmful for the environment.   

The conventional energy sources such as coal, oil, and natural gas, 
also known as fossil fuels, have been explored and exploited for power 
generation  in  power  plants  through  the  past  few  centuries.  The  most 
significant benefit of these energy sources is that they have high energy 
density. However, they emit carbon and other greenhouse gases when 
they are used. The global energy demand is rising each year and it is 
forecasted  that  the  energy  demand  will  have  increased  by  56%  from 
2010 levels by 2040 [1]. To reduce carbon emissions and fight global 
warming,  it  is  essential  to reduce  the  consumption  of  fossil fuels  and 
increase the utilization of the more readily exploitable renewable energy 
sources  (RESs)  in  the  energy  sector.  RESs  are  often  considered  to  be 
emission  free  and  environmentally  friendly  energy  sources.  Although 
RESs are far better than fossil fuels, research shows that they can have 
adverse effects on the environment. If the whole idea of adopting RES is 

to save the environment, their improper handling may do the opposite. 
Many research articles have been published in the literature that have 
discussed the negative environmental impacts of a few specific RESs [2]. 
However, there is a lack of research that focuses on all the RESs and 
demonstrates  their  potential  impacts  on  the  environment.  This  paper 
illustrates the environmental impacts of all RESs with a SWOT analysis 
and provides some guidance on how to alleviate those adverse impacts. 
With the arrival of the industrial revolution, the amount of green-
house gases started to rise in the atmosphere. Over the last century, the 
global temperature has increased because of greenhouse gas emissions 
[3].  At  present,  the  earth  is  getting  progressively  warmer  over  time. 
Extensive  use  of  fossil  fuels  is  one  of  the  main  reasons  for  global 
warming. Carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases are released 
into  the  environment  from  fossil  fuels-based  power  plants.  Approxi-
mately  35%  of  greenhouse  gases  are  emitted  because  of  the  existing 
power plants [4]. A study shows that, approximately 42% of NOx  and 

* Corresponding author. 

m.haque@cqu.edu.au (M.M. Haque).  

E-mail addresses: abidr92@gmail.com, abid.eee@aust.edu (A. Rahman), omarruet@gmail.com, omar.eee@aust.edu (O. Farrok), mdmejbaul.haque@anu.edu.au, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112279 
Received 27 May 2021; Received in revised form 10 February 2022; Accepted 13 February 2022   

RenewableandSustainableEnergyReviews161(2022)112279Availableonline10March20221364-0321/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.A. Rahman et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

38%  of  SO2  were  emitted  from  coal-based  power  plants  in  China  in 
2015. Around 40% of the total greenhouse gases were produced due to 
coal-based power plants [5]. These gases are responsible for entrapping 
heat  in  the  atmosphere  which  increases  the  global  temperature.  It  is 
imperative  to  accept  that  our  planet  will  become  less  livable  if  the 
temperature  continues  to  rise  at  its  current  rate.  The  increased  tem-
perature  melts glacier  ice  which  increases  the  sea  level  height.  Many 
islands as well as parts of many countries will drown, and catastrophic 
droughts and conflagrations will occur in many dry regions. To mitigate 
these problems, fast decarbonization of the power sector is required to 
◦
achieve the 2 
C warming target discussed in the Paris Agreements [4,6]. 
Moreover, usage of alternative sources of energy are being adopted. An 
annual investment of US$3.5 trillion is required in the renewable and 
sustainable energy sector until 2050 [7]. Power plants that use natural 
gas emit 50% less CO2 than that of other fossil fuel-based power plants. 
Hence, natural gas could be used as a transition fuel until RESs become 
more secure and sustainable [8]. The UN has proposed seventeen sus-
tainable development goals for a green environment where affordable 
and clean energy is at seventh position. RESs are considered as emission 
free  and  are  also  readily  accessible  in  nature.  Fig.  1  illustrates  the 
amount of electrical power generated by each type of RES based power 
plant [9]. It is evident that hydropower provides the highest proportion 
compared to any other RESs. Both solar PV and wind power each ac-
count for a quarter of the total share. Other RESs such as geothermal, 
concentrated  solar  thermal,  ocean,  and  bio-power  together  constitute 
the  remaining  percentage  which  is  just  over  6%.  The  contribution  of 
ocean power is only 0.02% although it has higher potential to increase 
this  outcome  compared  to  all  other  RESs.  The  utilization  of  RESs  for 
electricity production throughout the world is presented in Fig. 2 [10]. 
Overall,  many  nations in  Africa  and  the  Middle East  have  shares less 
than 20% whereas many countries in Europe and South America along 
with  Canada  are  above  60%.  Some  major  countries  such  as  the  US, 
Mexico, China, Australia, Russia, etc., have proportions between 20 and 
40%.  Many  countries  are  determined  to  reduce  their  dependence  on 
fossil fuels and adopt RESs to protect the environment. The European 
Union has set a target to become the world leader in RESs by 2030 [11]. 
Approximately 28% of the total demand of the UK can be fulfilled by 
tidal energy alone [12]. The concept of an energy hub where energy can 
be  generated,  utilized,  and  stored  is  being  explored  in  some  of  the 
published literatures [13–15]. 

While the use of RESs is essential for decarbonizing the power sector 
and to combat global warming, an obvious question arises as to whether 
this has any negative consequences on the environment. Research shows 
that many RESs have some adverse effects that are detrimental to the 
environment and nature. RESs are used to reduce harmful emissions for 
the betterment of the environment. However, the same environment can 
be harmed if the adverse effects of RESs are ignored. There is a dilemma 

where reliance on fossil fuels increases global warming and improperly 
regulated RESs can be detrimental for the environment. 

Environmental impacts for few RESs are assessed in the literature. 
Impacts related to decommissioned wind turbines are demonstrated in 
Ref.  [16].  Life  cycle  analysis  confirms  that  approximately  70–80%  of 
environmental impacts caused by wind turbines are due to the materials 
which are used for manufacturing purposes. A RES site selection process 
is  discussed  in  Ref.  [17],  where  economical,  technical,  and  environ-
mental criteria are defined. The study only focuses on photovoltaic (PV) 
modules and wind farms. Additionally, wave and tidal power plants are 
briefly  discussed. In  Ref.  [18],  various  electrochemical  effects  on  soil 
caused by wastewater from solar PV, wind, and biomass power plants 
are  studied.  The  study  presents  current  technologies  to  abate  these 
concerns.  However,  it  falls  short  in  regard  to  focusing  on  other  RES 
based power plants. Environmental impacts of biomass and wind power 
plants are analyzed in Ref. [19] using life cycle analysis, and the impacts 
are compared with each other. The study proposes that the most suitable 
location for a wind power plant is the desert. However, the study does 
not analyze other RESs. 

It should be noted that many research articles in the literature which 
focus  on  the  positive  prospects  of  RESs  tend  to  portray  the  negative 
impacts of fossils fuels on the environment. Thus, it often appears that 
the reduction of carbon emissions is the only solution to save the envi-
ronment. Additionally, RESs are often assumed to have no demerits. The 
number  of  research  papers  that  discuss  the  adverse  effects  of  RESs  is 
insignificant as compared to those where RESs are exalted. Hence, there 
should be a study where the negative impacts of all RESs are studied and 
discussed adequately. Therefore, this is considered as a most significant 
research  gap  that  needs  to  be  addressed  to  explore  the  full  range  of 
negative environmental impacts associated with all RESs. To the best 
knowledge of the authors, most studies cover the impacts of only a few 
RESs.  In  this  paper,  all  available  RESs  are  incorporated,  and  their 
negative impacts are discussed. The impacts of different RESs are sum-
marized and presented in a tabular format for convenience. Finally, the 
proper implementation approaches of the RESs to alleviate the negative 
environmental impacts are discussed. 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Harmful  impacts  of 
different  RESs  are  described  in  the  following  sections.  The  terrestrial 
RESs  are  discussed  from  section  2  to  5  whereas  sources  that  rely  on 
water are investigated from section 6 to 9. Section 2 describes the impact 
from  solar  based  power  plants.  Wind  related  issues  are  illustrated  in 
Section 3. The subsequent section discusses biomass related concerns. 
Impacts caused by geothermal power plants are described in Section 5. 
Section  6  explains  the  impact  caused  by  hydroelectric  power  plants. 
Section  7  provides  insights  regarding  the  effect  of  using  tidal  power 
plants. Impacts of ocean power plants are described in the next section. 
Effects  of  osmotic  power  plants  are  described  in  Section  9.  A  brief 

Fig. 1. Electrical power generation by RES based power plants [9].  

RenewableandSustainableEnergyReviews161(2022)1122792