Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Desalination 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/desal 

Synergies and potential of hybrid solar photovoltaic-thermal 
desalination technologies 

Wei He a,*, 1, Gan Huang b,c, 1, Christos N. Markides b, * 
a Department of Engineering, King's College London, London, UK 
b Clean Energy Processes (CEP) Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London, London, UK 
c Institute of Microstructure Technology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany   

H I G H L I G H T S  

G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T  

• Electrical  and  thermal  operation  map-
ping between PVT and desalination 
• Review  and  discuss  opportunities  for 
smart co-use of electricity and heat 
• Identified  new  integration  options  for 

PVT-desalination systems 

• Preliminarily  access  PVT-desal  with 

current solar-desal systems  

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Solar desalination 
Photovoltaic-thermal 
Solar energy efficiency 
Specific energy consumption 
Water production 

Solar desalination has emerged as a sustainable solution for addressing global water scarcity in the energy-water 
nexus, particularly for remote areas in developing countries. How to use the light spectrum through solar devices 
can profoundly affect the solar energy utilization, desalination rates, off-grid applicability, and water affordability. 
Solar photovoltaic (PV) and solar thermal (ST) respectively have enabled a variety of interesting solar desalination 
technologies, but the resulting applications usually limit the integration between solar and desalination to be either 
electrically or thermally connected. Here this review paper explores smart co-uses of heat and electricity from the 
sun to improve the efficiency, productivity, and independence of various solar desalination processes. It is found 
that coupling solar photovoltaic-thermal (PVT) with desalination could be a practical and immediately deployable 
route for plausibly more sustainable solar desalination than current solutions, because the combined electrical and 
thermal energy outputs from PVT panels could be used synergistically to catalyze the improvement on the solar 
energy efficiency, specific energy consumption, and specific water production, as well as the operational inde-
pendence for off-grid applications. Our preliminary analysis indicated an up to 20 % lower cost of PVT-desalination 
than current solar PV-desalination and ST-desalination but also with challenges discussed.  

* Corresponding authors. 

1  Shared first authorship. 

E-mail addresses: wei.4.he@kcl.ac.uk (W. He), c.markides@imperial.ac.uk (C.N. Markides).   

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2023.116424 
Received 31 October 2022; Received in revised form 11 January 2023; Accepted 22 January 2023   

Desalination552(2023)116424Availableonline7February20230011-9164/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).W. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

1. Introduction 

The  sustainable  and  secure  access  to  energy  and  other  resources, 
especially  water,  amid  continuing  global  population  and  economic 
growth is progressively impacting societies, leading to significant chal-
lenges, particularly in water-stressed areas, which will become home to 
two-thirds of the world's population by 2025 as water shortages worsen 
[1,2].  As  urbanization,  industrialization  and  population  growth  prog-
ress, the demand for the planet's freshwater resources increases, and the 
use of alternative water sources is essential [3,4]. Desalination, which 
involves  the  separation  of  salt  from  saline  water  (e.g.,  seawater)  to 
produce freshwater, has become increasingly important in this context. 
Currently, there are >15,000 operational desalination plants globally, 
which produce water at a rate of about 95 million m3/day5. However, 
these desalination plants are disproportionally located; about 71 % of 
global desalination capacity is sited in high-income countries [5]. 

High  energy  consumption  is  a  major  hindrance  to  the  widespread 
deployment of desalination. It leads not only to high costs of desalinated 
water  but  also  to  a  requirement  for  reliable  energy  infrastructure  to 
ensure production. Most of the energy supplied to current desalination 
plants comes from the burning of fossil fuels, which leads to significant 
emissions.  Solar-powered  desalination  has  emerged  as  an  affordable, 
sustainable alternative to conventional plants, as costs are much lower 
than those of fossil-fuel-powered desalination and solar abundance often 
occurs in areas of water scarcity. Tremendous interest in the develop-
ment of solar desalination has emerged in recent years [6], including the 
development  of  high-performance  materials  for photothermal  conver-
sion [7,8], high-efficiency system components and designs [9–12], and 
flexible ways to operate desalination plants via advanced control tech-
niques [13,14]. 

The wide variety of research efforts to integrate solar energy as the 
main energy source into desalination technologies have mainly fallen 
into two categories [15]: electrically-focused desalination, which relies 
on the use of photovoltaic (PV) cells [16,17], and heat-focused desali-
nation, which relies on the use of solar thermal (ST) collectors [18,19]. 
Recently, a third approach has emerged, which combines electrically- 
driven  desalination  with  ST-driven  organic  Rankine  cycles  [20], 
although such systems are still at an early stage of R&D compared to the 
other two. 

While these systems enable solar-to-water conversion, they pay less 
attention to utilize fully the available solar energy for water desalina-
tion. In PV-driven systems, the solar utilization efficiency is about 20 %, 
with the remaining 80 % rejected to the surroundings [21]. ST-driven 
systems  show  higher  solar  utilization  efficiency,  but  the  increased 
amount  of  energy  required  to  achieve  thermal  evaporation  leads  to 
lower  productivity  than  that  achieved  by  PV-driven  (i.e.,  electrical) 
desalination systems. Additionally, many ‘active’ ST-driven desalination 
systems require electrical power to pump water through the system, so 
they still require electricity from other sources (e.g., the grid) [22]. The 
dependence of these systems on electrical power leads to challenges in 
their use in unelectrified rural areas or adds operational costs in other 
applications. 

Solar photovoltaic-thermal (PVT) technology is a promising solution 
that hybridizes PV cells and a ST absorber in order to maximize solar 
utilization (or, harvesting) efficiency. Previous studies on the hybridi-
zation of PVT collectors with desalination modules have demonstrated 
the potential of such systems to increase the utilization of solar energy 
[23–26]. The overall efficiency of a PVT solar collector can reach 60-80 
%, which is typically higher than that of standalone PV or ST collectors, 
while simultaneously delivering useful electricity and heat as outputs 
[27]. This available dual-energy output from PVT collectors opens up a 
wide range of possibilities for their integration within wider solar gen-
eration systems [28], including opportunities for improved use of the 
full solar radiation in desalination processes while enabling operational 
independence of ‘active’ ST-desalination systems from the grid. The high 
solar-to-water efficiency potential of these systems also could promise 

significant reductions to the necessity for capital investment in land and 
system infrastructure. 

Previous studies have shown the benefits of PVT-desalination tech-
nologies on improving solar energy utilization [29], which could lead to 
increased water yield under the same solar conditions [30] and poten-
tially  reduced  water  costs  of  solar  desalination  [31].  However,  most 
previous  PVT-desalination  studies  to-date  have  focused  on  the  devel-
opment of system integration solutions between conventional PVT col-
lectors and desalination modules, and have not considered opportunities 
for  synergistic  electro-thermal  coupling  mechanisms.  Variation  in  the 
use of heat and electricity in desalination can improve the performance 
of  the  system  even  when  it  is  operated  at  similar  solar-energy  effi-
ciencies.  Therefore,  the  effective  use  of  the  combined  electrical  and 
thermal outputs from PVT collectors for water desalination requires an 
in-depth  understanding  of  the  fundamental  roles  that  heat  and  elec-
tricity play in different desalination processes. 

Therefore, in this perspective review, we focus on the synergies of 
electricity  and  heat  that  occur  between  the  energy  generation  from 
custom  hybrid  PVT  solar  collectors  and  the  energy  requirements  of 
various desalination technologies. We discuss ways in which electricity 
and heat gained from the sun can be co-used smartly for the effective 
desalination of saline water, which could create new integration options 
beyond  currently  electrically-driven  or  thermally-driven  processes  for 
solar desalination. In Section 2, we begin with an introductory review of 
various desalination and PVT technologies, in which we aim to show the 
operational conditions that offer opportunities for matching of energy 
generation  and  use.  The  section  may  also  serve  the  purpose  of  facili-
tating  readers  who  are  only  familiar  with  either  of  the  two  research 
topics focused –  desalination and solar PVT. For readers who already 
know  well  about  both  research  fields,  they  could  skip  Section  2.  In 
Section 3, we describe the mechanisms through which the combined use 
of electricity and heat can reduce entropy generation and improve the 
performance of desalination. We identify new opportunities for reducing 
the amount of energy that is consumed during desalination, improving 
water productivity and ion selectivity, mitigating salt scaling and con-
centration polarization (CP), and improving operational flexibility. We 
discuss the challenges of the smart use of PVT collectors for desalination. 
Lastly, in Section 4, we analyse preliminarily the performance and cost 
differences  between  PVT  desalination,  PV  desalination  and  ST  desali-
nation systems, and indicate in which situations PVT-desalination sys-
tems may be more affordable than the other two. The discussion shows 
that PVT desalination with improved performance could be applied to 
rural and urban water-scarce areas to sustainably cover the water de-
mand while mitigating emissions. A schematic illustration of the paper's 
structure is shown in Fig. 1. 

2. Review of desalination and PVT solar technologies 

2.1. Desalination: electrically and thermally driven technologies 

Desalination involves a portfolio of technologies that produce low- 
salinity  freshwater  from  saline  water  sources,  usually  brackish  water 
(BW)  or  seawater  (SW).  Based  on  the  main  form  of  energy  required, 
desalination is usually performed by electrically driven or heat-driven 
processes.  In  electrically  driven  desalination,  the  most  widely  used 
technologies  are  reverse  osmosis  (RO),  electrodialysis  (ED)  and  me-
chanical  vapour  compression  (MVC),  while  capacitive  deionization 
(CDI) is undergoing rapid development. The most developed processes 
that use heat as the main form of energy are multiple-stage flash (MSF) 
and  multiple-effect  distillation  (MED),  which  have  been  widely 
deployed in the Middle East. In the last decade, membrane distillation 
(MD) has also emerged as a compact, modular, membrane-based ther-
mal desalination technology. Diagrams that illustrate these desalination 
technologies are shown in Fig. 2. 

Desalination552(2023)1164242