Materials Today Nano 10 (2020) 100072

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Materials Today Nano

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p s : / / w w w . e v i s e . c o m / p r o ﬁ l e / # / M T N A N O / l o g i n

Polyanion-type electrode materials for advanced sodium-ion batteries

L.N. Zhao a, b, c, 1, T. Zhang a, c, 1, H.L. Zhao d, **
a Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
b Beijing Innovation Centre for Engineering Science and Advanced Technology (BIC-ESAT), China
c Beijing Key Laboratory for Magnetoelectric Materials and Devices (BKLMMD), China
d School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China

, Y.L. Hou a, b, c, *

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 15 November 2019
Received in revised form
27 December 2019
Accepted 8 January 2020
Available online 17 January 2020

Keywords:
Sodium-ion batteries
Polyanion
NASICON
Cathode materials
Anode materials

Electrical energy storage (EES) exploiting secondary battery technologies is ideal for large-scale energy
storage needs due to the rapid growth in proliferation of renewable energy sources and the emerging
markets of grid-scale battery applications. Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), a more sustainable EES option
alternative to lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), have attracted intensive interests over the past decade,
because of the natural abundance, evenly geographical-distributed Na-source, signiﬁcantly low cost, and
environmental benignity. Polyanionic compounds offer an appealing combination of rich structural di-
versity, superior ionic conductivity, high structural and thermal stability, and convenient storage/
handling, making them competitive and attractive candidate electrode materials for next generation
energy storage systems. In this review, recent advancements made regarding polyanion-type electrodes
used for SIBs are summarized, elaborating their intrinsic structural characteristics, electrochemical
properties, and corresponding sodium-storage mechanisms. Furthermore, we highlight the recent
achievements in the lab-scale Na-ion full-cell prototypes that consist of polyanion-type compounds as
one or both working electrodes. Last but not least, challenges and outlooks on further optimization of the
structure and the electrochemical performance of polyanion-type electrode materials for SIBs are also
presented to provide some insights to facilitate the practical realization of sodium-ion technologies.

© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Due to the economic and environmental vulnerability of fossil
fuels combustion, effectively exploiting renewable, sustainable, and
clean energy sources becomes especially urgent to address the
worldwide shortage of resources and global warming concerns. In
order to curb the renewable energy sources intermittency and
obtain stable and continuous generation of electricity for power
grid operations, developing performance- and cost-effective en-
ergy storage systems is of the prime necessity [1]. In the past de-
cades, electrical energy storage (EES) exploiting secondary battery
technologies revealed to be one of the most feasible options
because of their high energy round-trip efﬁciency, versatile power,
and suitable energy characteristics to meet various grid functions
successful
and

productions

Particularly,

scalable

[2,3].

* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: hlzhao@ustb.edu.cn (H.L. Zhao), hou@pku.edu.cn (Y.L. Hou).

1 These authors contributed equally to this work.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtnano.2020.100072
2588-8420/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

commercialization of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) in 1990 is a great
milestone, which not only catalyzes unprecedented applications of
electronics information industry, but also offers new opportunities
for better integration and penetration of renewable energy sources
[4]. Intrinsic ﬂexibility of battery storage technologies coupled to
renewable electricity sources will usher in revolution of our electric
infrastructure systems, even the entire ecology-economy model of
modern civilization [5]. It is called Smart Grid (Fig. 1), which works
as an enabling engine to transform the current energy industry into
a new era of reliability, availability, and efﬁciency that will
contribute to our economic and environmental health [6].

Apparently, the ultimate success of the Smart Grid is inseparable
from the effectiveness of large-scale energy storage. Nowadays, LIBs
are ubiquitous in the sector of small-scale consumer electronics and
gradually increasing the market share in battery electric vehicles.
LIBs have the ability to respond quickly to match the rapid growth
in renewable energy sources, due to the high energy density and
stable cycling properties of the already commercialized designs and
the potentials of different shapes and sizes. Yet, facing the steep
price rise and resource constraints from the scarcity and non-

2

L.N. Zhao et al. / Materials Today Nano 10 (2020) 100072

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

, N3(cid:2)

This problem can be circumvented by implementing polyanion-
type electrode materials with open framework providing pro-
nounced structural stability. Polyanionic compounds have become
in the last two decades the subject of very attractive research since
the discovery of electrochemical active LiFePO4 [16,21,75]. Poly-
anionic framework materials possess versatile and adjustable
n(cid:2)
: X ¼ B, C, S, P, Si, As,
structures, built on polyanionic groups [(XO4)m
Mo, W, V, or Ti, etc.] strongly covalent-bonded with [(MOx)n(cid:2)
:
M ¼ transition-metal] [76]. The “mixed-polyanionic units” can also
be realized by designing the join with other anions, such as [Y
, e.g.
, O2(cid:2)
, etc.] [X2Om: e.g. PO4eP2O7, SO4eS2O3, etc.], and
F
, OH
n(cid:2)
, e.g. PO4eCO3, PO4eSO4, PO4eNO3, etc.] [14,77]. Fig. 2
[(XO4)m
shows the crystal structures of the representative polyanionic
compounds, and the corresponding crystal structural parameters
are summarized in Table 1. Polyanion-type electrode materials are
particularly attractive and widely considered as futuristic Na-host
robust
electrodes due to the following considerations:
covalent-bonded framework provides high structural and thermal
stability, essential for extensive cycling life and safety issues. (2) A
large interstitial space generated from the open network structure
of interconnected conduction pathways leads to fast ionic con-
duction and low volumetric expansion during Na-ions sodiation/
desodiation processes. (3) Rich structural diversity allows the
monitoring of the given Mnþ
/M(n(cid:2)1)þ
redox couples and achieves
higher values of redox potentials than that of layer oxides through
the inductive effects introduced by Goodenough [78]. However, the
“weight penalty” from the presence of polyanion units and no
direct MeOMe electronic delocalization result in quite poor
intrinsic electronic conductivity in this class of material. To
compact this issue, coating with various conductive materials,
constructing special micro/nano structures, as well as lattice
doping are effective strategies to achieve high electrochemical
performance of polyanion-type electrode materials.

(1)

In this review, the recent research progress and prospective
future in the broad class of polyanion-type electrode materials for
SIBs are summarized. A detail account of various sodium-based
polyanionic compounds is given, focusing especially on intrinsic
structural
features, sodium-storage mechanisms, and electro-
chemical performance. We highlight the descriptions of the most
promising sodium-ion full-cells proposed so far on the use of
polyanion-type electrodes and the various architectures and stra-
tegies to enhance the electrochemical performances with regard to
full-cell characteristics and electrochemistry considerations.
In
addition, some of the practical challenges and future prospects
toward the commercialization of polyanion-type compounds for
SIBs are also included. The polyanion-type compounds are pro-
posed to be potential systems for large-scale energy storage
applications.

2. Structures and sodium-storage mechanisms

2.1. Polyanion compounds as cathode materials

2.1.1. Olivine and maricite NaFePO4

Because olivine-type LiFePO4 gains great commercial success in
LIBs owing to its low cost and high energy density, the sodium
counterpart, NaFePO4,
is one of the earliest and most widely
studied polyanionic compounds as cathode material for SIBs. Two
main types of structures of NaFePO4, olivine and maricite, have thus
far been reported to be Na insertion hosts for rechargeable
batteries.

Olivine NaFePO4 (Fig. 2a) crystallizes into an orthorhombic
structure (space group of Pnma), in which the Na and Fe atoms
occupy half of the octahedral sites, while the P atoms are conﬁned
the tetrahedral sites in a distorted
into the one-eighth of

Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of the Smart Grid.

uniform distribution of lithium resource, LIBs are believed to be not
the best choice for stationary, large-scale EES applications and, in
addition, there are growing concerns on adverse ecological hazards
upon disposal of toxic elements [7]. The challenges and demands
outlined above have motivated the researchers to pursue various
alternative battery chemistries (termed as “post-LIBs”), featuring as
low cost, widespread availability, and environmentally friendly, to
replace LIBs especially in applications unrestricted by high gravi-
metric and/or volumetric energy density [8].

Given the abundance of sodium-based resources and the
similar performance characteristics with LIBs, room-temperature
sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) hold great promise to meet large-
scale EES demands [9,10]. Comparing with Li, however, the large
ionic size of Na (1.02 Å vs. 0.76 Å) and its low standard electro-
þ
chemical potential vs. SHE (~2.71 V vs. Na
/
Li) as a consequence of sluggish redox kinetics, hugxe volume
variations, and low redox potentials resulted in less favorable
power and energy densities of SIBs and thus limiting their further
applications for grid-scale energy storage [11e13]. Tremendous
efforts have been geared to explore suitable electrode materials for
SIBs to match the performance and characteristics of modern LIBs
[14e18].

/Na and 3.04 V vs. Li

þ

A large variety of compounds have been unveiled with consid-
erable sodium-storage capacities for SIBs. Layered metal oxides
[19e23], polyanion compounds
[21,24,25], and metal hex-
acyanometalates [26e30] have been extensively investigated as
cathode materials, whereas hard carbon [31e34], metal alloys
[35e38], and transition-metal chalcogenides [39e42] have been
studied as anode materials. However, most of them suffer from
poor cycling performance owing to the structural instability during
Na-ions insertion/extraction processes. For example,
layered
transition-metal oxides possess high theoretical capacity, but un-
dergo very complicated multiphase transitions during Na-(de)
intercalation reactions, leading to rapid structural degradation of
the host materials [43,44]. In addition, Prussian blue analogues
synthesized by a conventional coprecipitation method always
contain a certain amount of lattice defects and coordinate water,
resulting in a huge loss of active sites and causing a severe problem
with electrolyte [45,46]. In the case of anode materials, huge
volumetric change, such as 400%e490% volume expansion from Sn
or P reacting with Na to form Na3.75Sn or Na3P, results in the pul-
verization of the active materials and rapid deteriorations of cycling
performances [47e49].

