Environmental Chemistry Letters (2023) 21:2003–2039 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-023-01591-5

REVIEW ARTICLE

Strategies to save energy in the context of the energy crisis: a review

Mohamed Farghali1,2 · Ahmed I. Osman3 
Pow‑Seng Yap4 · David W. Rooney3

 · Israa M. A. Mohamed2 · Zhonghao Chen4 · Lin Chen5,6 · Ikko Ihara1 · 

Received: 28 February 2023 / Accepted: 8 March 2023 / Published online: 23 March 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023

Abstract
New technologies, systems, societal organization and policies for energy saving are urgently needed in the context of accel-
erated climate change, the Ukraine conflict and the past coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic. For instance, concerns about 
market and policy responses that could lead to new lock-ins, such as investing in liquefied natural gas infrastructure and 
using all available fossil fuels to compensate for Russian gas supply cuts, may hinder decarbonization efforts. Here we review 
energy-saving solutions with a focus on the actual energy crisis, green alternatives to fossil fuel heating, energy saving in 
buildings and transportation, artificial intelligence for sustainable energy, and implications for the environment and society. 
Green alternatives include biomass boilers and stoves, hybrid heat pumps, geothermal heating, solar thermal systems, solar 
photovoltaics systems into electric boilers, compressed natural gas and hydrogen. We also detail case studies in Germany 
which is planning a 100% renewable energy switch by 2050 and developing the storage of compressed air in China, with 
emphasis on technical and economic aspects. The global energy consumption in 2020 was 30.01% for the industry, 26.18% 
for transport, and 22.08% for residential sectors. 10–40% of energy consumption can be reduced using renewable energy 
sources, passive design strategies, smart grid analytics, energy-efficient building systems, and intelligent energy monitoring. 
Electric vehicles offer the highest cost-per-kilometer reduction of 75% and the lowest energy loss of 33%, yet battery-related 
issues, cost, and weight are challenging. 5–30% of energy can be saved using automated and networked vehicles. Artificial 
intelligence shows a huge potential in energy saving by improving weather forecasting and machine maintenance and ena-
bling connectivity across homes, workplaces, and transportation. For instance, 18.97–42.60% of energy consumption can 
be reduced in buildings through deep neural networking. In the electricity sector, artificial intelligence can automate power 
generation, distribution, and transmission operations, balance the grid without human intervention, enable lightning-speed 
trading and arbitrage decisions at scale, and eliminate the need for manual adjustments by end-users.

Keywords  Energy saving · Energy crisis · Green energy alternative · Artificial intelligence · Electric vehicles · Renewable 
energy

Mohamed Farghali, Ahmed I. Osman, Israa M. A. Mohamed, 
Zhonghao Chen, Lin Chen have contributed equally to this work.

Disclaimer The views and opinions expressed in this review do not 
necessarily reflect those of the European Commission or the Special 
EU Programmes Body (SEUPB).

aosmanahmed01@qub.ac.uk

 *  Ahmed I. Osman 
 
 *  Lin Chen 
 
 *  Pow-Seng Yap 
 

chnlinchen@gmail.com

PowSeng.Yap@xjtlu.edu.cn

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

Introduction

Energy is required for several practical functions, including 
transportation, mobility, food preparation, water purification, 
communication, and others (Kalt et al. 2019; Vahidi and 
Sciarretta 2018). Global population and economic expan-
sion have contributed to increased energy use over time. The 
efficiency of energy end-use services has gradually improved 
due to technological advancement and energy efficiency 
legislation. Nevertheless, this improvement has not always 
been adequate to offset the increase in demand for energy 
services, such as the production and consumption of com-
modities. In addition, the ongoing conflict between Russia 
and Ukraine has caused an energy crisis that has directly 

Vol.:(0123456789)1 3 
2004

Environmental Chemistry Letters (2023) 21:2003–2039

affected the heating, cooling, and transportation energy costs 
of households. In 2021, the European Union imported over 
45% of its gas and nearly 40% of its total gas consumption 
(IEA 2022a).

Indirectly, this crisis has increased the prices of addi-
tional goods and services across global supply chains. In 
addition to the current energy crisis, the predominant source 
of carbon dioxide emissions, the primary greenhouse gas 
responsible for global warming, is the widespread use of fos-
sil fuels to produce energy (Farghali et al. 2022). Therefore, 
scholars and decision-makers generally agree that carbon 
neutrality by the middle of the century and other climate 
targets outlined in the Paris Agreement can only be achieved 
by gradually reducing global energy demand to a sustainable 
level as well as using negative emissions technologies.

Energy savings from energy efficiency and conserva-
tion offer additional co-benefits and contribute to national 
energy supply security and climate change mitigation. These 
include reducing local pollution, enhancing business com-
petitiveness, lowering household energy costs, boosting 
productivity, enhancing occupant health in buildings, and 
helping to lower energy poverty. A change in the behavior 
and way of life of energy end-users is required to achieve 
additional energy savings by reducing the need for services, 

which goes beyond investments in energy efficiency tech-
nologies, given the stringency and urgency of the climate 
target and the current global increase in energy demand. 
Energy performance criteria for vehicles, appliances, build-
ings, and financial incentives for new technology, and others 
have historically been the primary targets and promoters of 
energy efficiency innovations, as shown in Fig. 1.

In 2016, the combined building and transportation indus-
tries of the European Union consumed over 652.1 million 
tons of oil equivalent, accounting for more than 60% of total 
energy  consumption  (European-Environmental-Agency 
2018). Reducing energy usage and increasing efficiency 
in these two sectors is crucial for achieving the European 
Union’s 2050 roadmap goals, which require an 80% reduc-
tion in overall emissions from 1990 levels. Therefore, the 
review examines current and potential policy instruments to 
promote energy sufficiency and conservation, including pro-
gressive home appliances, buildings, and vehicle standards. 
The review also examines the energy crisis and explores 
the potential of renewable energy sources to address it. It 
focuses on how energy can be saved in buildings and vehi-
cles, including the use of electric and hydrogen-powered 
vehicles. In addition, the review investigates the role of arti-
ficial intelligence in assisting energy saving initiatives in 

Fig. 1   Strategy  for  energy  saving.  The  review  discusses  current  and 
new policies that address energy sufficiency and conservation, includ-
ing  progressive  home  appliances,  buildings,  and  vehicle  standards. 
First, the energy crisis and the potential of renewable energy as pro-
viding energy sources are examined. Second, we discuss how to save 

energy  from  buildings  and  vehicles,  as  well  as  the  uses  of  electric 
and hydrogen-powered vehicles in energy saving. Lastly, we identify 
the role of artificial intelligence in maximizing energy efficiency and 
achieving significant savings across multiple sectors

1 3