i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 4 7 ( 2 0 2 2 ) 2 4 1 3 6 e2 4 1 5 4

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / h e

The economics and the environmental benignity of
different colors of hydrogen

A. Ajanovic

*
, M. Sayer, R. Haas

Vienna University of Technology (TU WIEN), Vienna, Austria

h i g h l i g h t s

(cid:1) Technical, economics and environmental discussion on green hydrogen.
(cid:1) Different colors of hydrogen provide different environmental beneﬁts.
(cid:1) To date, grey hydrogen production is still the most economical way to produce hydrogen.
(cid:1) With technological learning, costs for green hydrogen will substantially decrease.
(cid:1) Green hydrogen could support ﬂexibility and decarbonization of the whole energy system.

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:

Received 3 January 2022

Received in revised form

3 February 2022

Accepted 11 February 2022

Available online 4 March 2022

Keywords:

Hydrogen production

Cost investigation

Environmental analysis

Vehicle deployment

Due to the increasing greenhouse gas emissions, as well as due to the rapidly increasing

use of renewable energy sources in the electricity generation over the last years, interest in

hydrogen is rising again. Hydrogen can be used as a storage for renewable energy balancing

the whole energy systems, and contributing to the decarbonization of the energy system,

especially of the industry and the transport sector.

The major objective of this paper is to discuss various ways of hydrogen production

depending on the primary energy sources used. Moreover, the economic and environ-

mental performance of three major hydrogen colors, as well as major barriers for faster

deployment in fuel cell vehicles, are analyzed.

The major conclusion is that the full environmental beneﬁts of hydrogen use are highly

dependent on the hydrogen production methods and primary sources used. Only green

hydrogen with electricity from wind, PV and hydro has truly low emissions. All other

sources like blue hydrogen with CCUS or electrolysis using the electricity grid have sub-

stantially higher emissions, coming close to grey hydrogen production. Another conclusion

is that it is important to introduce an international market for hydrogen to lower costs and

to produce hydrogen where conditions are best.

Finally, the major open question remaining is whether e including all external costs of
all energy carriers, hydrogen of any color may become economically competitive in any

sector of the energy system. The future success of hydrogen is very dependent on tech-

nological development and resulting cost reductions, as well as on future priorities and the

corresponding policy framework. The policy framework should support the shift from grey

to green hydrogen.
© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Hydrogen Energy Publications
LLC. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/

licenses/by/4.0/).

* Corresponding author. Vienna University of Technology (TU WIEN), Vienna, Austria.

E-mail address: ajanovic@eeg.tuwien.ac.at (A. Ajanovic).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.02.094
0360-3199/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. This is an open access article under the CC BY
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 4 7 ( 2 0 2 2 ) 2 4 1 3 6 e2 4 1 5 4

24137

Abbreviations:

CCUS
CLR

ALK
ATR
BEV
C
CCS

Alkaline water electrolysis
Autothermal reforming
Battery electric vehicle
Carbon
Carbon capture and storage CCU Carbon
capture and utilization
Carbon capture, utilization and storage
Chemical looping reforming CO Carbon
monoxide
Carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide equivalent
Electric vehicle
Fuel cell vehicle
Greenhouse gas
Hydrogen
Internal combustion engine
Polymer electrolyte membrane
Partial oxidation of methane
partial oxidation of oil products
Renewable energy sources
Sorption enhanced reforming
Steam reforming of natural gas
Solid oxide electrolyzer cell

CO2
CO2 eq
EV
FCV
GHG
H2
ICE
PEM
POM
POX
RES
SER
SMR
SOEC
TTW Tank-to Wheel
WTT Well-to-Tank
WTW Well-to-Wheels

Introduction

The current energy system is facing serious challenges and
needs signiﬁcant transformations. Over the last decades, it
can be noticed continuously increasing use of renewable en-
ergy sources (RES) all over the world. A combination of
renewable energy with energy-efﬁcient technologies should
allow decreasing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and local
air pollution.

Hydrogen is like electricity, a secondary energy carrier,
but it is also an energy vector, which can be used to convert,
store and release energy. With the increasing electricity
production from variable renewable sources such as wind
and PV, hydrogen is becoming an interest as a long-term
storage option for surplus electricity. Currently, hydrogen
is mostly used in various industrial applications, such as
reﬁning, steel-, ammonia- and methanol production, and
over the past years, demand for hydrogen was continuously
increasing. In 2020 the overall demand accounted for roughly
90 Mt, from which a little over 70 Mt were utilized as pure
hydrogen and 20 Mt were combined with other gases for
methanol and steel production [1].

In the future, it can be expected that demand will be much
higher in all applications. Due to the increasing emissions
from the transport sector, as well as due to the rapidly
increasing use of RES in electricity generation over the last
years, interest in hydrogen use for mobility is rising again
since green hydrogen can contribute to the decarbonization of
the transport sector.

However, until now, hydrogen was mostly produced using
the cheapest production processes without consideration of
the impact on the environment. Since steam reforming of
natural gas is the most developed and cheapest commercial
method for hydrogen production, the largest amount of
hydrogen is produced in this way. Overall, around 900 Mt of
CO2 emissions per year are released into the atmosphere by
worldwide hydrogen production [1]. With the pressing envi-
ronmental problems, interest in low-carbon hydrogen pro-
duction is increasing. However, this increase is still very slow
due to higher hydrogen production costs. Fig. 1 shows the
historical development of the low-carbon hydrogen produc-
tion for the period 2010 to 2020 (data for 2020 are announced).
To differ various ways of hydrogen production depending
on the primary energy sources, different colors are used. With
the increasing challenges to integrate variable renewables in
power systems, hydrogen production by electrolysis, so-called
green hydrogen, is becoming more relevant.

Over the last few years, hydrogen has increasingly been the
subject of various aspects of research. In general, the technical
papers can be divided into those dealing with different pro-
duction possibilities for hydrogen (colors) and speciﬁc tech-
nical aspects. Another strain of literature discusses the role of
hydrogen in the overall energy system, the costs of production
and the environmental impact.

One paper giving a comprehensive analysis of different
production methods is Dawood et al. [3]. In addition, they
criticize that the current color scheme does not specify the
exact amount of emissions generated by low carbon hydrogen
and present a new color spectrum approach. El-Shaﬁe et al. [4]
give a thorough analysis of different fossil and non-fossil pro-
duction methods. They further research the use of ammonia
decomposition and ﬁnd that it will be a commercial hydrogen
production method in the future. Ratnakar et al. [5] also list all
main hydrogen production methods and explain them in
detail. One of the main research dealing with the production
methods and all aspects from economic to environmental
impacts is done by Newborough and Cooley [6]. They ﬁnd that
green hydrogen will be the production method of the future as
it will become cheaper than the alternatives like blue hydrogen
caused by cheaper renewable electricity and electrolyzers.

Other authors focus on one production method or area, with
Midilli et al. [7] and Li and Cheng [8] on coal gasiﬁcation, Kho-
jasteh Salkuyeh et al. [9] on reforming of natural gas, Bauer et al.
[10], Howarth and Jacobson [11] and Ali Khan et al. [12] on blue
hydrogen, Amin et al. [13], Schneider et al. [14] and Leal P(cid:1)erez
et al. [15] on turquoise hydrogen and Gerloff [16] and Chi and Yu
[17] on green hydrogen production, which all will be further

