J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy (2016) 4(4):581–592
DOI 10.1007/s40565-016-0238-z

Stochastic coordinated operation of wind and battery energy
storage system considering battery degradation

Ying WANG1, Zhi ZHOU2, Audun BOTTERUD2, Kaifeng ZHANG1,
Qia DING3

energy

battery

storage

Abstract Grid-scale
systems
(BESSs) are promising to solve multiple problems for future
power systems. Due to the limited lifespan and high cost of
BESS, there is a cost-beneﬁt trade-off between battery effort
and operational performance. Thus, we develop a battery
degradation model to accurately represent the battery degra-
dation and related cost during battery operation and cycling.
A linearization method is proposed to transform the devel-
oped battery degradation model into the mixed integer linear
programming (MILP) optimization problems. The battery
degradation model is incorporated with a hybrid determinis-
tic/stochastic look-ahead rolling optimization model of wind-
BESS bidding and operation in the real-time electricity
market. Simulation results show that the developed battery

CrossCheck date: 17 September 2016

Received: 29 June 2016 / Accepted: 18 September 2016 / Published
online: 14 October 2016
(cid:2) The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at
Springerlink.com
& Kaifeng ZHANG

kaifengzhang@seu.edu.cn

Ying WANG
wangyingseu@126.com

Zhi ZHOU
zzhou@anl.gov

Audun BOTTERUD
abotterud@anl.gov

Qia DING
dingqia@sgepri.sgcc.com.cn

1 Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of CSE, School
of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China

2 Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
3 NARI Technology Co. Ltd., Nanjing 211106, China

degradation model is able to effectively help to extend the
battery cycle life and make more proﬁts for wind-BESS.
Moreover, the proposed rolling look-ahead operational opti-
mization strategy can utilize the updated wind power forecast,
thereby also increase the wind-BESS proﬁt.

Keywords Wind power, Battery energy storage system
(BESS), Battery degradation, Stochastic programming,
Rolling optimization

1 Introduction

With increasing penetration of wind generation, power
systems are faced with great challenges in dealing with the
variability and uncertainty of renewable resources. With
very ﬂexible charging-discharging characteristics, grid-
scale energy storage is one of many potential sources of
grid ﬂexibility which can aid variable renewable integra-
tion. An energy storage system can provide multiple
functions in coordinating wind power in the power system.
For example, energy storage can be used for load time
shifting, wind power smoothing or energy arbitrage. The
idea is to store energy during the periods of low demand or
low energy prices, and stands ready to dispatch energy to
the grid during the periods of high demand or high energy
prices. Energy storage can also provide ancillary services
to the system. Moreover, energy storage can be used to
reduce or eliminate the deviations from generation sched-
ules, making wind farms more like conventional genera-
tors. Meanwhile, energy storage can provide some other
services, like ﬂexible ramping capacity [1] or increased do-
not-exceed limits for wind power [2], in order to satisfy the
integration requirements from the power grid.

Among the energy storage systems available, the battery
energy storage system (BESS) is the most widely utilized

123

582

Ying WANG et al.

technology for wind farms because this technology has
been rapidly improved [3]. In recent years, there have been
many BESS announced, contracted and built for wind
farms around the world. For example, a 10 MW advanced
lead-acid battery and a 31.5 MW lithium-ion phosphate
battery are integrated with the 21 MW Kaheawa Wind
Power II project in Hawaii and the 100.5 MW wind farm in
West Virginia, respectively. In China, a 14 MW lithium-
ion phosphate battery and a 2 MW vanadium redox ﬂow
battery have been built in Zhangbei National Wind and
Solar Energy Storage and Transmission Demonstration
Project. Recent research efforts have focused on how to
coordinate the wind power with BESS for multiple objec-
tives, such as smoothing power ﬂuctuations [4, 5], energy
arbitrage
ancillary
[6],
services [8, 9].

regulation

other

and

[7],

in

cost

2015

lithium-ion

It is well known that one of the biggest barriers for
application of the grid-scale BESS is its high cost [10]. The
average
is
battery
350000*700000 $/MWh [11], and the realized investment
costs of grid-scale BESS are substantially higher. Mean-
while, energy storages have limited lifespan. For example,
the average full cycle life of the lithium-ion battery is only
4500 cycles [12]. Considering that the life of a battery is
much shorter than that of a conventional generator, and the
battery station investment cost and the battery cell
replacement cost are high, it becomes important to consider
the degradation cost of BESS. Furthermore, battery life-
time is closely related with the operational performances,
for instance, frequent and deep cycles accelerate cyclic
aging and reduce the cycle life [13]. Thus, the short-term
operation of a battery affects the overall lifetime of the
battery. The interplay between short-term operation and
long-term battery lifetime are therefore necessary to be
considered. There is a cost-beneﬁt trade-off between two
desirable goals,
i.e. 1) better battery health status and
longevity, and 2) better performance of a wind-BESS.
Generally, if one is willing to accept making less proﬁt in
the energy market (such as curtailing more wind power
sometimes), or a less smooth wind power output, the bat-
tery can spare some effort and degradation. Thus, it is
important to consider the battery degradation in order to
best take advantage of BESS. In many cases, it may be
proﬁtable to extend the BESS lifespan by adjusting its
operation to some degree.

The battery lifetime and degradation problems have
attracted attentions in recent
literatures. For microgrid
operation, [14] proposes a detailed physical-based degra-
dation model solved by dynamic programming. References
[15, 16] propose degradation models to extend battery life
in electric vehicles. Reference [17] builds a battery
degradation cost model in a short-term scheduling problem,
and proposes a big-M linearization method for degradation

123

calculation. Reference [8] considers degradation cost for
battery bidding in the ancillary service market, and solves
it by nonlinear solvers.

In this paper, we propose a method for coordinated oper-
ation of wind-BESS considering battery degradation. Com-
pared with existing research, our main contributions are:

1) We propose a hybrid deterministic/stochastic look-
ahead rolling optimization model
for coordinated
wind-BESS operation in the real-time market. Inspired
by the rolling optimization proposed in [18], we derive
a deterministic/stochastic model based on the timeli-
nes of a rolling wind power forecast and the real-time
market, which is suitable for wind-BESS real-time
operation and bidding.

2) We build a battery degradation model for the wind-
BESS operation. This is accomplished by introducing
degradation percentage constraints as well as a degra-
dation cost in the objective function. Compared to the
literature which ignores or simpliﬁes the battery cost,
such as [4, 18], this paper introduces a more accurate
battery degradation cost model representing degrada-
tion under different states of charge (SoCs) during
charging and discharging processes. Compared to the
existing battery degradation studies, such as [16, 17],
we propose a different linearization method to trans-
form the degradation model into a mixed integer linear
programming (MILP) problem, which can be solved
by commercial solvers, and therefore have great
potential to be used in multiple applications.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes
the overall wind-BESS look-ahead rolling optimization
method and its timeline. Section 3 introduces the back-
linearization
ground, mathematical
method of battery degradation. Section 4 presents the
wind-BESS model formulation. Section 5 provides results
from a case study. Section 6 concludes this paper.

formulation

and

2 Wind-BESS coordinated operation timeline

A hybrid deterministic/stochastic look-ahead rolling
optimization method of the wind-BESS is proposed, with
the assumed timeline in the real-time market as shown in
Fig. 1. The timelines of the real-time energy markets are
market dependent. For example, New York Independent
System Operator (NYISO) and California Independent
System Operator (CAISO) close the real-time market 75
minutes before the start of the operating hour and post the
real-time commitment results 45 minutes prior to the start
of the operating hour [19, 20]. In contrast, Midcontinent
Independent System Operator (MISO) closes it 30 minutes
before the operating hour [21]. In this paper, we assume

