Sodium-Ion Batteries

Recent Progress in Rechargeable Sodium-Ion Batteries: 
toward High-Power Applications

Xiangjun Pu, Huiming Wang, Dong Zhao, Hanxi Yang, Xinping Ai, Shunan Cao, 
Zhongxue Chen,* and Yuliang Cao*

The increasing demands for renewable energy to substitute traditional fossil 
fuels and related large-scale energy storage systems (EES) drive developments 
in battery technology and applications today. The lithium-ion battery (LIB), the 
trendsetter of rechargeable batteries, has dominated the market for portable 
electronics and electric vehicles and is seeking a participant opportunity in 
the grid-scale battery market. However, there has been a growing concern 
regarding the cost and resource availability of lithium. The sodium-ion battery 
(SIB) is regarded as an ideal battery choice for grid-scale EES owing to its 
similar electrochemistry to the LIB and the crust abundance of Na resources. 
Because of the participation in frequency regulation, high pulse-power 
capability is essential for the implanted SIBs in EES. Herein, a comprehensive 
overview of the recent advances in the exploration of high-power cathode and 
anode materials for SIB is presented, and deep understanding of the inherent 
host structure, sodium storage mechanism, Na+ diffusion kinetics, together 
with promising strategies to promote the rate performance is provided. This 
work may shed light on the classification and screening of alternative high 
rate electrode materials and provide guidance for the design and application 
of high power SIBs in the future.

can  provide  both  high  energy  density 
and  large  output  power,  accordingly  has 
captured  the  markets  of  portable  elec-
tronics  (W  level)  and  electrical  vehicles 
(KW  level).  Nevertheless,  the  implemen-
tation  of  LIB  into  grid-scale  ESS  (MW) 
is  constantly  postponed  due  to  cost  and 
safety  issues.  Although  the  lithium  iron 
phosphate  (LiFePO4)  battery  is  seeking  a 
participant  opportunity  in  the  grid-scale 
battery  market,  the  rising  cost  of  lithium 
resources,  as  opposed  to  their  reserves, 
is  likely  to  be  the  primary  concern  for  its 
potential application. Recently, sodium-ion 
battery (SIB) emerges as an attractive and 
promising alternative because of the prac-
tically  inexhaustible,  ubiquitous  and  low 
cost sodium resources.

1. Introduction

The exhaustion of fossil fuels has accelerated advancements in 
exploiting renewable energy sources; to cope with ever-growing 
energy  demand  and  better  make  use  of  sustainable  energy, 
multiscale energy storage systems (ESSs) have been intensively 
developed in recent years. Among various candidates, lithium-
ion battery (LIB) is considered as the pioneer technology which 

X. Pu, H. Wang, D. Zhao, Prof. S. Cao, Dr. Z. Chen
Key Laboratory of Hydraulic Machinery Transients
Ministry of Education
School of Power and Mechanical Engineering
Wuhan University
Wuhan 430072, China
E-mail: zxchen_pmc@whu.edu.cn
Prof. H. Yang, Prof. X. Ai, Prof. Y. Cao
Hubei Key Laboratory of Electrochemical Power Sources
College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences
Wuhan University
Wuhan 430072, China
E-mail: ylcao@whu.edu.cn

The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201805427.

DOI: 10.1002/smll.201805427

Despite  the  similar  electrochemistry  to 
the well-established LIBs technology, SIBs 
exhibit lower specific capacity and working 
potential  than  LIBs,  thus  demonstrating 
inferior  energy  density.  For 
instance, 
the  most  advanced  full  sodium-ion  bat-
tery  based  on  O3-Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48]O2  cathode  and  hard 
carbon anode developed by Hu and co-workers delivered a prac-
tical  energy  density  of  100  Wh  kg−1  with  an  average  operation 
voltage of 3.2 V, far lower than the energy density and working 
potential  (>200  Wh  kg−1,  3.7  V)  achieved  for  present  LIBs. 
Overall, the SIBs are almost impossible to enter the market for 
portable electronics and electric vehicles. The good news is that 
both  LIBs  and  SIBs  technologies  for  electricity  storage  system 
are currently at much earlier stages of development, therefore, 
SIBs  still  hold  a  great  chance  in  case  their  electrochemical 
performance  is  enormously  improved  and  their  cost  is  largely 
reduced.

The  primary  technology  characteristics  used  in  assessing  a 
battery’s  potential  for  use  in  grid-scale  energy  storage  applica-
tions include storage and operation properties, such as energy 
and power density, efficiency, scale, response time, lifetime and 
cost.  Up  to  date,  over  10  000  papers  on  SIBs  have  been  pub-
lished,  implying  SIBs  are  attractive  and  full  of  promise.  How-
ever, most of these works focused on the design, synthesis and 
modification  of  new  electrode  materials  with  enhanced  oper-
ating voltage and energy density, few of them paid attention to 
the power capability of the batteries. In practical terms, power 
density  rather  than  energy  density  is  often  a  more  important 
parameter  for  SIBs  in  electricity  storage  system.  Apart  from 

Small 2019, 15, 1805427

1805427  (1 of 33)

© 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

reviewwww.small-journal.comthe  general  function  for  smoothing  out  the  fluctuations 
from renewable energy sources (wind, solar, etc.) and reducing 
the  need  for  “peaker”  plants,  grid-level  battery  also  provides 
short-term  emergency  backup  power,  and  contributes  in  fre-
quency regulation by delivering active power when the grid fre-
quency is dropping below a certain lower threshold and charge 
when  the  frequency  is  above  a  certain  upper  threshold.  The 
amount  of  energy  charged  and  discharged  is  proportional  to 
the frequency deviation, and the discharge duration time varies 
from 1 to 15 min, with shallow charge and discharge for 20 to 
40  cycles  per  day.  In  this  context,  power  capability  of  SIBs  is 
essential  for  their  successful  applications  in  electricity  storage 
system (Figure 1).

Generally,  the  power  capability  of  a  SIB  depends  critically 
on the speed at which Na+ ions and electrons migrate through 
the electrolyte and bulk electrode. For a long time, sodium ion 
is  widely  recognized  as  having  sluggish  movement  compared 
with lithium ion due to its large ionic radius. However, recent 
studies  have  revealed  that  there  are  a  great  number  of  SIBs, 
either half or full cells, exhibit high power characteristics, thus 
providing  a  compelling  rationale  to  enable  SIBs  to  serve  as  a 
high  power  supply  when  proper  material  and  rational  design 
are  elaborately  established.  Unfortunately,  there  is  no  evident 
borderline  between  high  energy  and  high  power  batteries; 
accordingly,  no  common  standard  that  defines  high  power 
battery  is  given  until  now.  Particularly,  most  previous  works 
only  investigate  the  rate  performance  of  a  single  electrode 
(cathode or anode), this will bring out relatively great deviation 
in evaluating the power capability of a full battery since all the 
factors related to the power performance should be considered, 
such  as  the  voltage  gap  between  the  cathode  and  anode,  the 
electrochemical  kinetics  of  both  electrodes,  battery  design  and 
manufacture,  and  so  on.  Nonetheless,  the  power  output  of  a 
full SIB depends mostly on  the electrochemical characteristics 
of its cathode and anode, in this sense, the property of a single 
electrode can be assessed to predict its potential application in 
high power SIBs.

Now,  there  is  no  commonly  accepted  standard  with  which 
to define high power electrode materials; this will bring a chal-
lenge  to  select  practicable  alternative  electrodes  for  grid-scale 
SIBs  from  a  vast  number  of  cathodes  and  anodes  reported  so 
far.  Despite  this,  we  can  still  gauge  their  application  prospect 
according  to  the  requirements  of  current  electricity  storage 
system. In this context, electrode materials which are capable of 
discharging  in  1–15  min  and  cycling  shallowly  for  20–40  times  
a day are included within the scope of this review. Specifically, 
an  output  power  density  of  at  least  2  KW  kg−1  is  essential  for 
a  single  cathode  in  a  half  cell  with  sodium  metal  as  anode 
(strictly speaking, power density could only be used to evaluate 
full  batteries,  but  we  can  still  get  a  hint  about  their  rate  capa-
bilities by half cell’s data in massively published works, so  the 
power  density  provided  below  is  calculated  based  on  the  mass 
of  cathode  if  it  is  not  specified),  considering  the  capacity  of 
most state-of-art cathode materials are around 100 mAh g−1, the 
operating voltage of the cathodes at 10 C (≈1000 mA g−1) should 
be kept above 2.0 V. For anode materials, it is logically required 
that  the  working  potentials  should  be  low,  generally  in  the 
range of 0−1.0 V (vs Na/Na+). Especially for high power appli-
cation, anode materials should be able to tolerate high current 

Xiangjun Pu received his 
B.Sc. degree in 2016 in energy 
chemical engineering from 
Wuhan University, China. 
Now, he is pursuing a Ph.D. 
degree in energy storage 
and conversion science. 
His research objective is to 
design green and sustain-
able materials, and advanced 
electrolytes for rechargeable 
batteries.

Zhongxue Chen received 
his B.Sc. degree in 2007 
and Ph.D. degree in 2012 
from Wuhan University, and 
worked as a visiting scholar 
in the Pennsylvania State 
University from 2010 to 2011. 
Currently, he is an associate 
professor in the School 
of Power and Mechanical 
Engineering in Wuhan 
University. His research 

interests focus on energy storage/conversion materials  
and devices.

Yuliang Cao received his Ph.D. 
degree in 2003 from Wuhan 
University, and then he worked 
as a visiting scholar in Pacific 
Northwest National Laboratory 
from 2009 to 2011. He is now 
a professor in the college 
of chemistry and molecular 
sciences, Wuhan University. 
His research interests focus 
on developing advanced 
energy storage materials (e.g., 
carbonous materials, alloy nanocomposite anodes, transition 
metal oxide cathodes, phosphate framework materials, and 
novel safety electrolytes) for lithium/sodium ion batteries.

impulses (10 C) and eliminate the sodium-dendrite hazard. Up 
to date, there have been many review papers published on elec-
trode  materials  and  full  cells  of  SIBs.  However,  to  the  best  of 
our knowledge, there is no special review on high power SIBs 
as well as high rate electrode materials. In this review, we will 
present  the  most  recent  progress  on  high  power  cathode  and 
anode materials for sodium-ion batteries, focusing on the fun-
damental  aspects  of  synthesis,  structure  and  electrochemistry. 
Special  attention  is  given  to  the  discussions  of  crystal  struc-
ture characteristics, and sodium storage mechanisms of typical 
electrode  materials,  also  the  effects  of  their  intrinsic  structure 
features  and  nonstructural  engineering  on  the  sodium  ion 

Small 2019, 15, 1805427

1805427  (2 of 33)

© 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.advancedsciencenews.comwww.small-journal.com 16136829, 2019, 32, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.201805427 by University Of Adelaide, Wiley Online Library on [29/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License