Energy Reports 9 (2023) 1535–1548

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Energy Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/egyr

Research paper

An improved genetic algorithm based fractional open circuit voltage
MPPT for solar PV systems
Aakash Hassan a,∗

, Octavian Bass a, Mohammad A.S. Masoum b

a School of Engineering, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, 6027, WA, Australia
b Department of Engineering, Utah Valley University, Orem, UT 84058, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 6 August 2022
Received in revised form 22 November 2022
Accepted 23 December 2022
Available online 2 January 2023

Keywords:
Fractional Open Circuit Voltage
Genetic Algorithm
MPPT
Solar PV

To extract the maximum power from solar PV, maximum power point tracking (MPPT) controllers
are needed to operate the PV arrays at their maximum power point under varying environmental
conditions. Fractional Open Circuit Voltage (FOCV) is a simple, cost-effective, and easy to implement
MPPT technique. However, it suffers from the discontinuous power supply and low tracking efficiency.
To overcome these drawbacks, a new hybrid MPPT technique based on the Genetic Algorithm (GA)
and FOCV is proposed. The proposed technique is based on a single decision variable, reducing the
complexity and convergence time of the algorithm. MATLAB/Simulink is used to test the robustness
of the proposed technique under uniform and non-uniform irradiance conditions. The performance
is compared to the Perturb & Observe, Incremental Conductance, and other hybrid MPPT techniques.
Furthermore, the efficacy of the proposed technique is also assessed against a commercial PV system’s
power output over one day. The results demonstrate that the proposed GA-FOCV technique improves
the efficiency of the conventional FOCV method by almost 3%, exhibiting an average tracking efficiency
of 99.96% and tracking speed of around 0.07 s with minimal steady-state oscillations. Additionally, the
proposed technique can also efficiently track the global MPP under partial shading conditions and offers
faster tracking speed, higher efficiency, and fewer oscillations than other hybrid MPPT techniques.

© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1. Introduction

Solar PV output directly depends upon the solar irradiance
intensity and temperature, which are intermittent and make so-
lar PV output highly non-linear, as illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2.
Therefore, to harvest the maximum power from solar PV systems,
a control unit is needed to track the maximum power point
(MPP) under varying environmental conditions. Improving the
maximum power point tracking (MPPT) algorithms is one of the
easiest ways to improve solar PV system performance (Masoum
et al., 2002).

During the previous decade, substantial efforts were made to
develop new MPPT techniques (De Brito et al., 2013). A compre-
hensive review on the classification and performance of different
MPPT techniques is presented in Karami et al. (2017), Bollipo
et al. (2021). MPPT techniques can be broadly classified into three
groups: offline, online, and hybrid (Reza et al., 2013). The offline
methods, including constant voltage, short circuit current, and
open circuit voltage track the MPP using predefined parame-
ters calculated from PV panel characteristics and do not actually

∗

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: aakashh@our.ecu.edu.au (A. Hassan).

measure the PV power output during operation. Although offline
methods are simple, economical, and easy to implement, they of-
fer low tracking efficiency as they assume some parameters to be
constant even under varying environmental conditions (Karami
et al., 2017; Reza et al., 2013).

The lookup table technique, one of the offline MPPT methods,
uses pre-saved parameters for each corresponding solar irra-
diance and temperature value, resulting in improved tracking
speed and efficiency (Bollipo et al., 2021). In Kota and Bhukya
(2016), a 2-D lookup table with maximum power point voltages
for 77 combinations of irradiance and temperature levels was
developed. The results demonstrated a higher tracking speed and
reduced oscillations with almost the same tracking efficiency
(95%) compared to the Perturb and Observe (P&O) technique.
However, this technique required large memory to set up the
database with 77 combinations. A comparative analysis between
the lookup table and P&O was performed in Udavalakshmi and
Sheik (2018). The lookup table was formed by saving the corre-
sponding DC/DC converter’s duty cycles for 70 different irradiance
and temperature levels. It was found that the proposed technique
exhibits a faster response than P&O with almost zero oscillations
at MPP but needs large memory to save the required parameters.
A hybrid variable step P&O and lookup table based MPPT tech-
nique was proposed in Sarika et al. (2020) to overcome the large

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2022.12.088
2352-4847/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).

A. Hassan, O. Bass and M.A.S. Masoum

Energy Reports 9 (2023) 1535–1548

drawbacks. For instance, P&O leads to oscillations around MPP
even after MPP has been found and results in unnecessary power
loss. Additionally, it may lose its tracking direction under rapidly
changing environmental conditions and is also prone to a trade-
off between accuracy and speed (Desai and Patel, 2007; Jain
and Agarwal, 2007). Whilst the IC technique has demonstrated
better performance than P&O and exhibits very low steady-state
oscillations, it requires an expensive floating-point core controller
to solve the differential equations (De Brito et al., 2013). To
overcome these drawbacks, some authors have reported modified
P&O techniques with improved MPPT performance.

Variable perturbation steps were introduced in Wolfs and Tang
(2005), Patel et al. (2009), but these techniques are not genuinely
adaptive and depend on the initial user-defined step constants.
In Ali et al. (2018), a modified P&O was proposed, which works
by dividing the P–V curve into four regions and then adjusting
the step size according to the distance from MPP. Although the
tracking speed gets improved, steady-state oscillations are not
fully eliminated. Additionally, tracing the operating point in one
of the four sectors is challenging, especially during a rapid change
in irradiance. In Ahmed and Salam (2015), an adaptive perturba-
tion step was proposed to reduce the steady-state oscillations in
the conventional P&O. At the start, an initial perturbation step
size of 2% of open circuit voltage (Voc ) is applied, which is then
gradually reduced by 0.5% during each step until 0.5% of Voc is
reached. Moreover, to overcome the loss of tracking direction un-
der rapidly varying irradiance, boundary limits of ±5% of Voc were
imposed on the operating MPP. Despite some improvements in
the tracking efficiency and steady-state oscillations, this approach
slows down the tracking speed due to the added complexity
in the conventional algorithm. Additionally, as Voc varies with
varying irradiance and temperature, adjusting the perturbation
step size and boundary limits on the basis of a fixed Voc may lead
to divergence from the true MPP. To avoid the drift problem in
the conventional P&O, an extra checking condition of change in
current along with the change in power was proposed in Killi and
Samanta (2015). Nonetheless, this technique reduces the tracking
speed due to added conditional statements and is not entirely free
from steady-state oscillations.

The hybrid MPPT techniques are well-known for tracking the
MPP with higher accuracy as compared to the offline or online
methods. The hybrid techniques perform MPPT in two steps and
employ more advanced tools such as fuzzy logic, Artificial Neural
Networks, and optimization algorithms (Reza et al., 2013). During
the first step, the desired parameters are first optimized using
one of the previously mentioned advanced techniques. In the
second step, obtained optimum parameters are used to accurately
track the MPP using conventional MPPT methods. In Harrag and
Messalti (2015), an improved P&O algorithm with adjustable step
size was proposed, where GA was employed to tune the PID
parameters such that the power output from the DC/DC converter
is optimized through an adaptive duty cycle. A similar approach
of optimizing PID controller parameters have also been reported
in other studies (Badis et al., 2018; Lasheen et al., 2016). Although
these studies reported improved performance in terms of ripple
factor, response time, and overshoot, the MPPT accuracy was only
marginally improved as these studies focused only on optimizing
the PID controller parameters but did not consider improving
the MPPT algorithm. A real-time GA based MPPT technique was
developed in Hadji et al. (2018). In comparison with the con-
ventional techniques, it was found that the proposed approach
performs better in terms of accuracy, speed, and convergence.
However, this technique requires the continuous measurements
of both Voc and short circuit current (Isc ) to perform the MPPT
and thus needs extra sensors and pilot PV modules, incurring
additional costs. In Senthilkumar et al. (2022), a comparative

Fig. 1. I–V and P–V characteristic curves of selected PV module (MonoX
LG265S1W-B3) at different irradiance levels (Electronics, 2014).

Fig. 2. I–V and P-V characteristic curves of selected PV module at different
temperatures (Electronics, 2014).

memory requirement issue. Although this technique required
relatively less memory, tracking speed and MPPT efficiency were
also improved; the proposed algorithm depicted large oscilla-
tions, particularly at low irradiance levels. In Banakhr and Mosaad
(2021), an adaptive MPPT based on a lookup table compris-
ing PI controller parameters optimized through the Harmony
Search (HS) algorithm was proposed. The results demonstrated
that the proposed technique offers better performance than the
conventional P&O and Incremental Conductance (IC) techniques,
however, it also suffers from large memory requirement problem.
Online techniques such as P&O, Hill Climbing (HC), and IC
trace the MPP by continuously adjusting the converter’s duty
cycle based on real-time PV power measurements (Reza et al.,
2013). These techniques have been more extensively used in
the literature as they provide better solution to the manufactur-
ers. However, these techniques also suffer from some significant

1536

