Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

A review of solar hybrid photovoltaic-thermal (PV-T) collectors 
and systems 

María Herrando a, b, Kai Wang c, Gan Huang b, d, Todd Otanicar e, Osama Bany Mousa f, 
Rafaela A. Agathokleous g, Yulong Ding h, Soteris Kalogirou g, Ned Ekins-Daukes i, 
Robert A. Taylor f, Christos N. Markides b, * 
a Fluid Dynamics Technology Group, I3A, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, 50007, Spain 
b Clean Energy Processes (CEP) Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, UK 
c Institute of Refrigeration and Cryogenics, Key Laboratory of Refrigeration and Cryogenic Technology of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China 
d Institute of Microstructure Technology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany 
e Department of Mechanical and Biomedical Engineering, Boise State University, Boise, USA 
f School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia 
g Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering, Cyprus University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus 
h Birmingham Centre for Energy Storage & School of Chemical Engineering, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK 
i School of Photovoltaic & Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia  

A B S T R A C T    

In this paper, we provide a comprehensive overview of the state-of-the-art in hybrid PV-T collectors and the wider systems within which they can be implemented, 
and assess the worldwide energy and carbon mitigation potential of these systems. We cover both experimental and computational studies, identify opportunities for 
performance enhancement, pathways for collector innovation, and implications of their wider deployment at the solar-generation system level. First, we classify and 
review the main types of PV-T collectors, including air-based, liquid-based, dual air–water, heat-pipe, building integrated and concentrated PV-T collectors. This is 
followed by a presentation of performance enhancement opportunities and pathways for collector innovation. Here, we address state-of-the-art design modifications, 
next-generation  PV  cell  technologies,  selective  coatings,  spectral  splitting  and  nanofluids.  Beyond  this,  we  address  wider  PV-T  systems  and  their  applications, 
comprising a thorough review of solar combined heat and power (S–CHP), solar cooling, solar combined cooling, heat and power (S–CCHP), solar desalination, solar 
drying and solar for hydrogen production systems. This includes a specific review of potential performance and cost improvements and opportunities at the solar- 
generation system level in thermal energy storage, control and demand-side management. Subsequently, a set of the most promising PV-T systems is assessed to 
analyse their carbon mitigation potential and how this technology might fit within pathways for global decarbonization. It is estimated that the REmap baseline 
emission curve can be reduced by more than 16% in 2030 if the uptake of solar PV-T technologies can be promoted. Finally, the review turns to a critical examination 
of key challenges for the adoption of PV-T technology and recommendations.   

1. Background and introduction 

1.1. Context and motivation 

The interest in and demand for alternative energy from renewable 
sources has continued to rise globally in recent decades, promoted by an 
increase  in  environmental  awareness  and  the  growing  importance 
placed on sustainability, reducing energy consumption and the associ-
ated emissions and pollution. In 1992, the Rio Convention on Climate 
Change  [1]  established  a  framework  for  actions  aimed  at  reducing 
fossil-fuel consumption and limiting the associated emissions. In 2015, 
over  190  countries  signed  a  legally-binding  agreement  at  the  Paris 

◦

Climate Conference [2] to keep the rise in the average global tempera-
C (above 20th-century pre-industrial levels) [3]. To ach-
ture below 2 
ieve this challenging target, a fundamental transformation of the global 
energy system is required, which has in fact been taking place in recent 
decades [4]. 

Renewable  energy  systems  have  been  the  main  drivers  and  will 
continue to be essential for this transformation as they contribute to all 
objectives:  promoting  the  security  of  supply  while  lowering  energy 
costs,  reducing  emissions  while  driving  growth  and  generating  jobs 
through industrial development. A record 200 GW of renewable energy 
capacity was added in 2019. Renewable energy accounted for 27% of 
global  electricity  use  and  over  18%  of  the  world’s  total  energy  con-
sumption according to the latest REN21 report [5]. Solar energy remains 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: c.markides@imperial.ac.uk (C.N. Markides).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101072 
Received 30 August 2021; Received in revised form 29 November 2022; Accepted 1 January 2023   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)101072Availableonline12April20230360-1285/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).M. Herrando et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Nomenclature 

a-Si 
AHP 
ANN 
ASHP 
AZO 
BIPV 
BIPV-T 
c-Si 
CCHP 
CIGS 
CHP 
COP 
CPC 
CPV 
CPV-T 
CSP 
D 
DASC 
DCMD 
DEC 
DHW 
DNI 
DSM 
DX 
Eg 
Eth 
ETC 
FF 
FPC 
G 
GHI 
GNP 
HCE 
HDH 
HP 
HVAC 
I 
IEA 
ITO 
IR 
IX 
J01 
Jsc 
k 
KPI 
LCA 

amorphous silicon 
analytic hierarchy process 
artificial neural network 
air-source heat pump 
aluminium zinc oxide 
building-integrated PV 
building-integrated PV-T 
monocrystalline silicon 
combined cooling, heat and power 
copper indium gallium selenide 
combined heat and power 
coefficient of performance 
compound parabolic collector 
concentrated PV 
concentrated PV-T 
concentrated solar power 
pipe diameter 
direct absorption solar collector 
direct contact membrane distillation 
desiccant cooling systems 
domestic hot water 
direct normal incident radiation 
demand-side management 
direct expansion 
band-gap energy 
threshold for the onset of absorption 
evacuated-tube collector 
fill factor 
flat-plate collector 
solar irradiance 
global horizontal irradiation 
graphene nanoplatelets 
heat collection element 
humidification-dehumidification 
heat pump 
heating cooling and air conditioning 
electric current 
international energy agency 
indium tin oxide 
infrared 
indirect expansion 
diode saturation current density 
cell short-circuit current density 
Boltzmann constant 
key performance indicator 
life cycle assessment 

national determined contribution 

latent heat storage 
membrane distillation 
multi-effect distillation 

LHS 
MD 
MED 
MWCNT multi-walled carbon nanotube 
NDC 
NePCM  nano-enhanced PCM 
NSGA-II  non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm 
O&M 
ORC 
PC 
PCM 
pc-Si 
PEM 
PMMA 
PTC 
PV 
PV-T 
q 
REmap 
RES 
rev 
RO 
SAHP 
SBS 
SH 
SHC 
SHJ 
ST 
SHS 
T 
TCOs 
TCS 
TES 
TIM 
TOPSIS 

operation and maintenance 
organic Rankine cycle 
polycarbonate 
phase-change material 
polycrystalline silicon 
proton exchange membrane 
poly(methyl methacrylate) 
parabolic-trough collector 
photovoltaic 
PV-thermal 
electric charge 
renewable energy roadmap 
renewable energy systems 
reversible 
reverse osmosis 
solar assisted heat pump 
spectral beam splitting 
space heating 
solar heating and cooling 
silicon heterojunction 
solar thermal 
sensible heat storage 
temperature 
transparent conducting oxides 
thermochemical storage 
thermal energy storage 
transparent insulation material 
technique for order preference by similarity to ideal 
solution 
technology readiness level 
Trombe wall 
underfloor heating 
US dollar 
ultraviolet 
voltage 
open-circuit voltage 
distance between the pipes 
width to pipe-diameter ratio 

TRL 
TW 
UFH 
USD 
UV 
V 
Voc 
W 
W/D 
W&ASHP water & air-source heat pump 
WSHP  water-source heat pump  

a small fraction of this total (below 2%) despite its fast growth compared 
to other renewable sources (solar thermal (ST) systems: 8% per year, 
photovoltaic (PV) systems: 37% per year, both on average since 2010 
[6]).  This  growth  has  been  made  possible  by  the  implementation  of 
national policies that have supported renewable projects in Europe, and 
by  the  Chinese  policy  of  subsidies  for PV  systems  [5,7]. In  2019, the 
renewable energy sector employed 11.5 million people, among these 4.6 
million were employed in the solar sector [8]. 

Solar energy is an abundant primary-energy resource, which can be 
exploited  in  cost-competitive  and  reliable  ways  for  electrical  power 
generation,  either  with  PV  technology  or  thermodynamic  cycles  in 
concentrated solar power (CSP) systems, as well as for heating or cooling 
purposes through ST systems. Some of the advantages of this renewable 
resource compared to others, e.g., wind, are its larger predictability on 

an annual basis and daily [9], the low degradation rate of the compo-
nents of a solar installation during its lifetime which is generally 20–25 
years [10,11], and that this technology rarely underperforms or fails. 
For example, long-term field data show that PV panels experience, on 
average, a power output loss of only 0.5% per year [12], and only 2% of 
the PV panels installed do not meet the manufacturer’s warranty after 10 
years [13]. 

The  total  worldwide  power  generation  capacity  of  installed  PV 
panels increased by 12% in 2019 and reached a record of 630 GW in 
total, while the thermal energy generation capacity of installed ST col-
lectors  amounted  to 480  GW  (thermal  Watt) in  2019,  with China  ac-
counting  for  almost  70%  of  the  total  solar  thermal  capacity  [6,14], 
which corresponds to savings of about 140 million tons of CO2 per year 
[6]. The PV market is driven by China, Japan and the US, and several 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010722