Received: 6 May 2023

Revised: 23 September 2023

Accepted: 3 October 2023

DOI: 10.1002/prs.12541

O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E

Introduction to grid-scale battery energy storage system
concepts and fire hazards

Veronica Goldsmith

Arup, Los Angeles, California, USA

Correspondence
Veronica Goldsmith, Arup, 900 Wilshire Blvd.,
19th floor, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Email: veronica.goldsmith@arup.com

Abstract

As the world continues to enact progressive climate change targets, renewable

energy solutions are needed to achieve these goals. One such solution is large-scale

lithium-ion battery (LIB) energy storage systems which are at the forefront in ensur-

ing that solar- and wind-generated power is delivered when the grids need it most.

However, the perceived hazards of LIBs due to recent events in the United States

and Australia pose a risk to their future success. When a battery energy storage sys-

tem (BESS) has a multilayered approach to safety, the thermal runaway, fire, and

explosion hazards can be mitigated. Successful

implementation of this approach

requires cooperation, collaboration, and education across all stakeholder groups to

break down these preconceived notions. Much can be learned from the recent BESS

fire and explosion events to inform safer design and operation. These events and

their contributing factors share many commonalities with historic losses in the hydro-

carbon industry. Fire and process safety engineers who have traditionally worked in

the hydrocarbon industry can be of immense value to the BESS industry.

K E Y W O R D S

alternative energy infrastructure, BESS, energy storage, fire engineering, lessons learned

1

| B A T T E R I E S , P O WE R , A N D T H E GR I D

supplying when the conditions are less than favorable. This energy

balancing challenge is symbolized in Figure 1. It is imperative that this

The way in which the world generates, transmits, and uses its energy

theoretical scale is balanced. Energy storage is a piece of the solution,

is changing. We have been decarbonizing our electricity networks and

along with distributed generation and microgrids, which can hypothet-

transitioning our vehicles to run from petroleum fuels to batteries/fuel

ically tip the scale.

cells. Additionally, we are striving to make upgrades and expansions

The risks of imbalance in the electrical grid are significant, most

to transmission networks and use energy more wisely.

recently highlighted by a severe winter storm in Texas in February

We are now generating power with wind, solar, and wave tech-

2021, which resulted in the usage of power significantly outpacing

nologies, which are variable generation technologies because supply

production. As shown in Figure 2, this resulted in the Texas energy

will vary over time based on the weather, daylight, and gravitational

grid frequency dropping below a safety threshold of 59.4 hertz. Had

forces. When coupled with inflexible generation, such as nuclear

the frequency stayed below this threshold for 9 min, the entire net-

which cannot quickly ramp up and down to match changes in energy

demand, energy balancing issues ensue. This is because these variable

work would have shut down, as generating units would have tripped,
disconnecting from the grid to protect themselves.1

and inflexible generation technologies do not provide the stable out-

There are a number of opportunities for energy storage to be

put that fossil fuels historically could guarantee. In a system where

deployed throughout the electricity network. Energy storage is not

supply constantly must meet the demand, we are in danger of over-

just limited to large power plants; it can be deployed at many loca-

generating when the renewable generation is high and under-

tions along the network. Power generation is being decentralized:

Process Saf Prog. 2024;43:357–363.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/prs

© 2023 American Institute of Chemical Engineers.

357

358

GOLDSMITH

F I G U R E 1

The energy balancing challenge.

F I G U R E 2

Texas 2021—Rapid decrease in generation resulting in frequency drop.2

businesses and homeowners are now generating power too. Some

medical devices, cars, and houses and can bring stability to our

electricity companies even allow these users to sell electricity back to

the power grid or receive credits through net metering. Businesses

power grids. Some benefits of LIBs for energy storage are their high
energy density, power density,3 and efficiency. With increasing

can utilize energy storage for reliable or uninterrupted power supply.

Energy storage downstream of distribution can relieve peak loads by

demand for LIBs, the prices were reducing until 2022 when a 7%
increase4 was seen due to increase in raw material cost. Lithium

buying/charging during low demand and selling/discharging during

high demand. Along transmission lines, storage can also offer opportu-

carbonate and lithium hydroxide prices saw the greatest rises in
2022.4

nities for grid stabilization.

2

|

L I T H I U M - I O N BA T T E R I E S

One form of energy storage is using lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). The
first commercial LIBs were introduced in 1991.2 What once just pow-

ered our personal electronics and power tools is now used to power

foils.

Over the past 30 years, many types of LIBs have been developed,

each chemistry having its trade-offs with respect to thermal stability,

specific power, safety, performance, and cost. A LIB typically gets its

name from the cathode chemistry. The primary components of a LIB

are the cathode, anode, electrolyte, separator, and current collectors.

Table 1 outlines various compositions of the first four components.

Today's current collectors are made of thin copper and aluminum

 15475913, 2024, 2, Downloaded from https://aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/prs.12541 by University Of Adelaide, Wiley Online Library on [29/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License