Biological Trace Element Research (2024) 202:360–386
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12011-023-03645-9

Applications of Green Synthesized Metal Nanoparticles — a Review

Seerengaraj Vijayaram1 · Hary Razafindralambo2,3 · Yun‑Zhang Sun1 · Seerangaraj Vasantharaj4 · 
Hamed Ghafarifarsani5 · Seyed Hossein Hoseinifar6 · Mahdieh Raeeszadeh7

Received: 10 December 2022 / Accepted: 20 March 2023 / Published online: 13 April 2023 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023

Abstract
Green nanotechnology is an emerging field of science that focuses on the production of nanoparticles by living cells through 
biological pathways. This topic plays an extremely imperative responsibility in various fields, including pharmaceuticals, 
nuclear energy, fuel and energy, electronics, and bioengineering. Biological processes by green synthesis tools are more 
suitable to develop nanoparticles ranging from 1 to 100 nm compared to other related methods, owing to their safety, eco-
friendliness, non-toxicity, and cost-effectiveness. In particular, the metal nanoparticles are synthesized by top-down and 
bottom-up approaches through various techniques like physical, chemical, and biological methods. Their characterization is 
very vital and the confirmation of nanoparticle traits is done by various instrumentation analyses such as UV–Vis spectro-
photometry (UV–Vis), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), scanning electron microscope (SEM), transmis-
sion electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), atomic force microscopy (AFM), annular dark-field imaging 
(HAADF), and intracranial pressure (ICP). In this review, we provide especially information on green synthesized metal 
nanoparticles, which are helpful to improve biomedical and environmental applications. In particular, the methods and 
conditions of plant-based synthesis, characterization techniques, and applications of green silver, gold, iron, selenium, and 
copper nanoparticles are overviewed.

Keywords  Plants · Metal/metal oxide nanoparticles · Antimicrobial · Anticancer · Dye degradation · Wastewater treatment

jmusunyunzhang@163.com

 *  Yun-Zhang Sun 
 
 *  Hamed Ghafarifarsani 
 

hamed_ghafari@alumni.ut.ac.ir

1  Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, China
2  ProBioLab, Teaching and Research Centre, Gembloux 
Agro-Bio Tech, University of Liege, Liège, Belgium
3  BioEcoAgro Joint Research Unit, TERRA Teaching 

and Research Centre, Microbial Processes and Interactions, 
Gembloux AgroBio Tech/Université de Liège, Gembloux, 
Belgium, University of Liege, Liège, Belgium

4  Department of Biotechnology, Hindusthan College of Arts 
and Science, Coimbatore 641028, Tamil Nadu, India
5  Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Natural Resources, 

Urmia University, Urmia, Iran

6  Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Fisheries 

and Environmental Sciences, Gorgan University 
of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources, Gorgan, Iran

7  Department of Basic Sciences, Sanandaj Branch, Islamic 

Azad University, Sanandaj, Iran

Introduction

Green synthesis of nanoparticles using living cells through 
biological pathways is more efficient techniques and yields 
a higher mass when compared to other related methods. 
Plants are the sources of several components and biochemi-
cals that can role as stabilizing and reducing agents to syn-
thesize green nanoparticles. The green synthesized methods 
are eco-friendly, non-toxic, cost-effective, and also more 
stable when compared to other biological, physical, and 
chemical methods [1]. Green synthesis of nanoparticles is 
categorized into three groups, viz. extracellular, intracellu-
lar, and phytochemicals. The nanoparticle synthesis from 
plant extract is an inexpensive process and it results in higher 
yield due to the huge quantity of phytochemical components 
in the plant extract that can also act as reducing and stabiliz-
ing agents converting metal ions into metal nanoparticles 
[2]. Green synthesized metal and metal oxide nanoparticles 
have emerging applications in the biomedical sector like 
diagnostics, wound healing, tissue treatment, immunother-
apy,  regenerative  medicine,  dentistry,  and  biosensing 

Vol:.(1234567890)1 3Applications of Green Synthesized Metal Nanoparticles — a Review  

361

platforms. Biotoxicology and its antimicrobial, antifungal, 
and antiviral characteristics were passionately contested [3]. 
Plant-mediated copper oxide nanoparticles synthesized from 
various plant extracts play a various role like diverse biologi-
cal activities, environmental remediation, photocatalysis, 
catalytic reduction, sensing, energy storage, and several 
organic transformations such as coupling, reduction, and 
multicomponent reactions [4]. Green synthsized selenium 
nanoparticles are helpful to improve the activity in antioxi-
dant, catalysis, anticancer, photocopiers, xerography, recti-
fiers, and solar cells [5]. Green synthesized cerium oxide 
nanoparticles have potential photocatalytic dye degradation, 
antioxidant activity, antidiabetic, anticancer antibacterial, 
and antifungal activity properties [6]. Green synthesized 
stannic oxide nanoparticles have potential photocatalytic, 
antioxidant, and antibacterial activity, and these nanoparti-
cles are helpful to enhance the environment and human 
health applications [7].Green synthesized silver chloride 
nanoparticles are used to develop environmental and bio-
medical applications [8]. Green synthesized metal nanopar-
ticles are produced from different parts of the plants and also 
these methods are eco-friendly, non-toxic, and cost-effective 
method. Green synthesized nanoparticles have more active 
performance to remove dyes, antibiotics, and metal ions 
compared to other physical and chemical methods [9]. Green 
synthesis method is the best method for the preparation of 
nanoparticles, and these methods are helpful to reduce the 
toxicity, increase the stability, eco-friendly, and cost-effec-
tive methods. Green synthesis methods have more beneficial 
response in environmental and biomedical applications [10]. 
Plants contain many types of phytochemical compounds like 
phenolics, terpenoids, polysaccharides, and flavonoids that 
possess oxidation–reduction capabilities. Thus, they are 
preferably utilized for the green synthesis of nanoparticles 
[11]. Phytochemical compound synthesis of nanoparticles 
is not a general procedure as essential knowledge of the 
exact phytochemical components is needed for the synthesis 
of stabilized nanoparticles [12]. It is a general point of view 
that plants’ secondary metabolites (polyphenols) are the 
mainly significant elements playing a very important func-
tion in the progression of the green synthesis of nanoparti-
cles. The green synthesis practice is more advanced, safe and 
cost-effective, easily reproduce, and stable [13]. There are 
some positive impacts on the plant-based green synthesis of 
nanoparticles when compared to the other related biological 
methods using bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes, and algae 
[14]. Diverse plant parts (roots, stem, leaf, seed, and fruit) 
are concerned with such synthesized green nanoparticles 
because of the presence of notable phytochemicals [15]. 
Plant-synthesized nanoparticles in dissimilar parts of plants 
involve washing the particular part with tap or distilled water 
followed by squeezing, filtering, and adding particular salt 
solutions. Then, metallic salt was added and nanoparticles 

are extracted. A variety of metallic nanoparticles are synthe-
sized by this method. The green nanoparticles are used in 
personal care, medicine, nano-enabled devices, food, aqua-
culture sciences, and agricultural products. Green synthesis 
of nanoparticles is eco-friendly; this method is generally 
used for the industrial production of metal nanoparticles. 
Green synthesized metal nanoparticles are produced from 
physicochemical methods [16]. A biosynthesis approach is 
a vital mechanism to avoid harmful by-products via eco-
friendly and sustainable development. The biosynthesis pro-
cess is involved in several biological structures, namely plant 
extracts, bacteria, yeast, seaweeds, and algae to produce 
metal and metal oxide nanoparticles [17]. Sharma et al. 
(2015) reported the green synthesis, characterization, and 
application of a variety of metal nanoparticles, which can 
eliminate pollutant dyes from water such as azo dyes, acid 
dyes, and cationic dyes. The metallic nanoparticles are used 
to remove water pollutants from water bodies such as rivers, 
lakes, and other water streams, thereby enhancing aquatic 
life. Green synthesized nanoparticles can be applied to treat 
environmental pollutants. Earlier studies report that the cata-
lytic characteristics of some nanoparticles can reduce the 
toxicity of environmental pollutants [18, 19]. Green synthe-
sis processes to metal nanoparticles are eco-friendly, non-
toxic, and cost-effective. Also, these methods are playing a 
very significant role in the pharmaceutical industry [20]. The 
broad application of metallic nanoparticles utilized in vari-
ous fields like biology, medicine, pharma, and other fields 
has led to high demand for these nanoparticles and thereby 
resulting in a significant need for better production of such 
nanoparticles. The efficiency of metallic nanoparticles used 
against human pathogenic microbes has made nanoparticles 
attractive in biomedical fields [21]. Particularly, metal nano-
particles have elevated outside the region and more attractive 
sites to support quicker response which enhances production 
yields. These metallic nanoparticles are generally divided 
into  two  groups,  namely  noble  and  non-noble  metallic 
groups based on nanoparticle types. The metallic nanopar-
ticles are inexpensive, eco-friendly, non-toxic, and reduce 
the accumulation of hazardous wastes. Green syntheses of 
metallic nanoparticles are safer for biomedical and environ-
mental applications [22, 23]. A notable perspective of dif-
ferent metal nanoparticles is to be used as antimicrobial 
medicine (antiviral, antibacterial, fungicidal, antiparasitic, 
and pesticide agents, etc.) alongside some plant diseases 
[24]. A cancer nanobullet is significant in treating cancer 
because it is very effective and safe. The use of cancer nan-
odrugs considerably increased drug delivery to the target 
when compared to the conventional drug administration 
system. It notably improves the safety and competence of the 
regularly  utilized  anticancer  drugs.  Effective  targeting, 
delayed release, long-lasting half-life, and reduced toxicity 
are  the  major  positive  effects  of  nanomedicine  delivery 

1 3