Energy Policy 77 (2015) 79–88

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Energy Policy

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/enpol

The merit-order effect in the Italian power market: The impact of solar
and wind generation on national wholesale electricity prices$
Stefano Clò n, Alessandra Cataldi, Pietro Zoppoli
a Department of the Treasury (DT) of the Italian Ministry of Economy and Finance(MEF), Italy1

H I G H L I G H T S

(cid:1) We ﬁnd empirical evidence of the merit-order effect in the Italian market.
(cid:1) 1 GWh from solar and wind (hourly average) reduces prices by 2.3€/MW and 4.2€/MWh.
(cid:1) The impact of RES on price has declined as RES production has increased.
(cid:1) Monetary savings from solar production do not compensate the cost of the incentives.
(cid:1) Monetary savings from wind production are higher than the cost of the incentives.

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 25 July 2014
Received in revised form
28 November 2014
Accepted 29 November 2014
Available online 16 December 2014

Keywords:
Renewables
Electricity price
Merit-order effect
Feed-in tariff
Italian wholesale power market

Italy promoted one of the most generous renewable support schemes worldwide which resulted in a
high increase of solar power generation. We analyze the Italian day-ahead wholesale electricity market,
ﬁnding empirical evidence of the merit-order effect. Over the period 2005–2013 an increase of 1 GWh in
the hourly average of daily production from solar and wind sources has, on average, reduced wholesale
electricity prices by respectively 2.3€/MWh and 4.2€/MWh and has ampliﬁed their volatility. The impact
on prices has decreased over time in correspondence with the increase in solar and wind electricity
production. We estimate that, over the period 2009–2013, solar production has generated higher
monetary savings than wind production, mainly because the former is more prominent than the latter.
However, in the solar case, monetary savings are not sufﬁcient to compensate the cost of the related
supporting schemes which are entirely internalized within end-user tariffs, causing a reduction of the
consumer surplus, while the opposite occurs in the case of wind.

& 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

The Italian power market has undergone signiﬁcant changes in
recent years. Among these changes, one of the most relevant is the
growth in wind and photovoltaic (PV) power capacity promoted by
national support schemes for renewable energy sources (RES).
While wind power capacity has been mainly supported through a
Green Certiﬁcates Scheme, solar power capacity has been directly
subsidized through a Feed-in Premium, known as Conto Energia.

The Conto Energia represents one of the most impressive PV
supporting schemes in the world (IEA, 2011). Thanks to massive
investments in wind and solar installed capacity2 (EPIA, 2012; IEA,
2013), wind and solar power generation substantially increased –
by 23 TWh from 2008 to 2013 – constituting “an undisputed world
record” according to the IEA (IEA, 2013). Over the same period,
energy demand decreased by 43 TWh in conjunction with the
ﬁnancial crisis and the subsequent economic recession (Fig. 1).

☆We thank the GME for having provided the data and for its support. We are also
grateful to Emanuele Bacchiocchi, Susan Battles and Michael Benton for their
comments. The usual disclaimer applies.

n Correspondence to: Università di Milano, DEMM–Department of Economics,

Management and Quantitative Methods, Via del Conservatorio 7, Milan, Italy.

E-mail address: stefano.clo@unimi.it (S. Clò).
1 The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not ne-

cessarily reﬂect those of the MEF and the DT

2 In a ﬁrst phase 2005–2007, RES support schemes promoted some initial in-
vestments in intermittent RES power capacity which, however, covered only a
marginal position: 3 GW in 2007 or 1.6% of total installed power capacity according
to data on power installed capacity provided by the Italian Transmission system
operator (Terna s.p.a.). In the period 2008–2010, wind and solar power capacity
grew from 4 GW to 9 GW (þ 49% annual average growth rate), while in the years
2011–2012, it surged from 9 GW to 25 GW, covering 12% of total national power
capacity. At the time of writing this article, ofﬁcial data on installed capacity for
2013 were not yet available.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2014.11.038
0301-4215/& 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

80

S. Clò et al. / Energy Policy 77 (2015) 79–88

Fig. 1. RES power generation by source in the day-ahead Italian market (2013 data refer to the period January–October) (TWh).
Source: own elaboration on GME.

The contraction in electricity consumption as well as the sig-
niﬁcant growth in solar and wind power generation have drasti-
cally changed the Italian electricity mix, with a sharp increase in
the RES share. Indeed, in less than ten years, the share of RES in the
day-ahead power market increased from 17% in 2005 to 40% in
2013.3 This growth comes almost entirely from non-program-
mable wind and solar RES.

These changes on both the demand and supply side of the day-
ahead power market had a non-negligible impact on the Italian
wholesale electricity price. Subsequently to the bullish trend over
the period 2005–2008, the wholesale electricity price sharply
collapsed during the ﬁnancial crisis. Then, following a subsequent
recovery, from the beginning of 2012 the price trended again
downward, in conjunction with both the economic recession and
RES penetration (Fig. 2).

The penetration of intermittent RES can explain part of this
decline. Wind and solar energy sources have very low operational
costs and they are dispatched on a legal priority basis with respect
to electricity generated by non-renewable sources. In particular,
the GSE (Gestore dei Servizi Energetici)4 works as a non-pro-
grammable RES collector as it bids in the day-ahead market at a
zero price an amount of electricity equal to the forecasting of the
intermittent RES power generation.5 Thus, wind and solar power
generation effectively enters the day-ahead market at the base of
the merit-order function and shifts it to the right (the same pro-
cess is described by Ketterer, 2012; Nicolosi and Fürsch, 2009;
Zachman, 2013). Most expensive marginal plants are driven out of
the market, thus favoring a decline in the clearing wholesale
electricity price (Fischer, 2006).6 Various papers ﬁnd empirical

3 Details on the energy mix by source and its change over time are reported in

the Appendix A.

4 The GSE (Gestore dei Servizi Energetici) is the public institution which di-
rectly pays the economic incentives to the producers of power generated by re-
newable sources.

5 When the day-ahead forecasting deviates from the day-of effective RES
power generation, traditional sources are called to cover the gap in the day-of
balancing market (mercato di aggiustamento), whose analysis goes beyond the
scope of this paper.

6 This effect has been represented also in an alternative way: an increase in RES
power generation shifts the residual demand function to the left along a given
supply curve (Sensfuss et al., 2008, Hirth, 2013, O’Mahoney and Denny, 2011). At
the same time, self-produced and consumed electricity reduces the net demand
and shifts it to the left along a given supply curve. While these representations are
equivalent in terms of market equilibrium, we opt to represent the merit-order
effect in terms of supply curve shift (see Fig. 3–5), because RES generation effec-
tively bids via the GSE in the day-ahead market and enters the market at the base

evidence of the merit-order effect in various countries: Germany
(Ketterer, 2012; Würzburg et al., 2013), Spain (Gelabert et al.,
2011), Israel (Milstein and Tishler, 2011), Denmark (Jonsson et al.,
2010), Texas (Woo et al., 2011) and Ireland (O’Mahoney and Denny,
2011). These studies differ with respect to econometric approach,
types of renewable sources and country analyzed, as well as fre-
quency of the data used; but they all converge towards the con-
clusion that RES penetration has lowered wholesale electricity
prices.7 For the purpose of this paper, we recall that Gelabert et al.
(2011) and Würzburg et al. (2013) both ﬁnd that the reduction in
wholesale electricity prices induced by higher RES production
offsets the increase in ﬁnal electricity retail prices induced by RES
support schemes (subsidies directly paid by consumers in the ﬁnal
energy bill). They respectively conclude that in Spain and Germany
the increase in electricity production from RES has generated a net
beneﬁt to consumers.

Our paper aims to extend this empirical literature by assessing
the merit-order effect in the Italian day-ahead wholesale power
market over the period 2005–2013. Since Italian RES supporting
policies have been subject to political debate due to the cost of the
subsidies internalized within end-user tariffs, we are interested in
assessing to what extent the penetration of solar and wind elec-
tricity sources has lowered day-ahead wholesale electricity prices
and whether such a reduction has been sufﬁcient to offset the cost
of the RES support schemes borne by ﬁnal consumers.

Based on a consolidated empirical approach (Woo et al., 2011),
we develop a quantitative analysis to assess the extent to which
variations in consumption patterns and in the energy mix have
had an impact on the national wholesale electricity price (PUN).8
While existing literature has mainly focused on wind generation,
or has treated wind and solar generation jointly (named inter-
mittent RES), we disentangle the differential impact of solar and
wind generation on Italian day-ahead wholesale electricity prices
over the period 2005–2013. Moreover, as RES production has in-
creased greatly from year to year during the considered period, we
impact of
are

interested in understanding whether

the

(footnote continued)
of the merit-order function.

7 Würzburg et al. (2013) develop an exhaustive review of this literature and a
meta-analysis of various studies on the German market and conclude that 1 addi-
tional GWh produced by wind technology reduces the German wholesale elec-
tricity price between 0.5 and 2.0 €/MWh. A similar result is found by Gelabert et al.
(2011) concerning the Spanish market.

8 Prezzo Unico Nazionale (Single National Price).

