A
r
t
c
l
e

i

www.acsnano.org

Bacterial Growth-Induced Tobramycin Smart
Release Self-Healing Hydrogel for
Pseudomonas aeruginosa-Infected Burn
Wound Healing
Ying Huang, Lei Mu, Xin Zhao, Yong Han, and Baolin Guo*

Cite This: ACS Nano 2022, 16, 13022−13036

Read Online

ACCESS

Metrics & More

Article Recommendations

*sı Supporting Information

ABSTRACT: Burns are a common health problem worldwide and are
highly susceptible to bacterial infections that are difficult to handle with
ordinary wound dressings. Therefore, burn wound repair is extremely
challenging in clinical practice. Herein, a series of self-healing hydrogels
(QCS/OD/TOB/PPY@PDA) with good electrical conductivity and
antioxidant activity were prepared on the basis of quaternized chitosan
(QCS), oxidized dextran (OD), tobramycin (TOB), and polydopamine-
coated polypyrrole nanowires (PPY@PDA NWs). These Schiff base cross-
links between the aminoglycoside antibiotic TOB and OD enable TOB to
be slowly released and responsive to pH. Interestingly,
the acidic
substances during the bacteria growth process can induce the on-demand
release of TOB, avoiding the abuse of antibiotics. The antibacterial results showed that the QCS/OD/TOB/PPY@PDA9
hydrogel could kill high concentrations of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA), Staphylococcus aureus, and Escherichia coli in a short
time and showed a bactericidal effect for up to 11 days in an agar plate diffusion experiment, while showing good in vivo
antibacterial activity. Excellent and long-lasting antibacterial properties make it suitable for severely infected wounds.
Furthermore, the incorporation of PPY@PDA endowed the hydrogel with near-infrared (NIR) irradiation assisted bactericidal
activity of drug-resistant bacteria, conductivity, and antioxidant activity. Most importantly, in the PA-infected burn wound
model, the QCS/OD/TOB/PPY@PDA9 hydrogel more effectively controlled wound inflammation levels and promoted
collagen deposition, vascular generation, and earlier wound closure compared to Tegaderm dressings. Therefore, the TOB
smart release hydrogels with on-demand delivery are extremely advantageous for bacterial-infected burn wound healing.
KEYWORDS: antibiotic smart release hydrogel, burn wound healing, bacterial growth response, on-demand delivery, antibacterial infection

B urns are the fourth most common destructive trauma

worldwide and are prevalent
in both military and
civilian populations.1,2 Healing of burn wounds requires
the substitution of inactivated tissue, and this is a more delicate
and complex process than other wound repair processes.3,4
Furthermore, burn injuries are highly vulnerable to invasive
microbial
infections before complete epithelialization, with
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) and Staphylococcus aureus (SA)
infections.1,2,5 Wound
being the most prevalent microbial
infection will seriously affect the process of wound healing,
such as inflammation resolution, epidermal maturation, and
neovascularization.2 Severe infections can even cause compli-
cations such as sepsis, which can be life-threatening.6,7
Therefore,
require immediate
to prevent complications.2 The
antimicrobial
process of healing a burn wound is a lengthy and arduous
one. Although many kinds of different wound dressings have

susceptible burn wounds

treatment

been developed for burns in recent years with obvious healing-
promoting effects, most of
them do not have excellent
antibacterial ability to prevent burn wound infection and
cannot cope with infected burn wounds.8−14 Therefore,
developing an ideal dressing that can effectively deal with
infected burn wounds remains a challenge.

Tobramycin (TOB) can treat various bacterial infections,
clinically mainly for serious infections caused by sensitive
bacteria, especially those due to Gram-negative bacteria, such

June 7, 2022

Received:
Accepted: August 1, 2022
Published: August 3, 2022

© 2022 American Chemical Society

13022

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c05557
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 13022−13036

Downloaded via UNIV OF ADELAIDE on June 29, 2024 at 09:25:18 (UTC).See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.ACS Nano

www.acsnano.org

Article

Figure 1. (a) Synthesis of QCS. (b) Synthesis of OD. (c) Synthesis of PPY@PDA NWs. (d) Diagram of QCS/OD/TOB/PPY@PDA hydrogel
formation.

as burn infections caused by PA.15−17 TOB exerts
its
bactericidal effect by inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis
and damaging bacterial cell membranes.18−20 Although TOB
exhibits excellent antibacterial effects,
it is a concentration-
dependent antibiotic and incorrect or uncontrolled use may
cause serious irreversible side effects.16,18,21 Therefore, the
development of a bacterially induced on-demand release TOB
hydrogel system is promising for burn wound healing.

On the other hand, chitosan, with good biocompatibility, has
abundant medical advantages, such as hemostasis and wound
healing ability.22−24 Quaternized chitosan (QCS) makes up for
the poor water solubility of chitosan and provides the ability to
resist drug-resistant bacteria.25−28 In addition, dextran can
trigger the body’s immune system,29,30 and it
is rich in
aldehyde groups after oxidation and can react with QCS to
form self-healing hydrogels by Schiff base reaction. TOB
belongs to the aminoglycoside antibiotics, and it can be reacted

with oxidized dextran (OD) to forming a cross-linked network
through Schiff base reaction. Therefore, we hypothesize that
loading TOB into the QCS/OD hydrogel system can realize
the slow and sustained release of TOB in the physiological
environment. Furthermore, the bacteria release acidic sub-
stances such as lactic acid and carbonic acid as they grow.
Therefore, in the process of bacterial multiplication, the pH-
responsive Schiff base hydrogel will rapidly release TOB to
eliminate bacteria and protect the wound from infection.31,32
The bacterial response behavior can precisely control TOB
release, which meets the requirement for on-demand drug
delivery. Moreover, the incorporation of PPY@PDA nanowires
with good electrical conductivity, antioxidant activity, and
photothermal behavior further enhanced the wound-healing-
promoting ability of the hydrogel.33−38 Therefore, TOB smart
release hydrogels based on QCS and OD and combined with
in the repair of PA-
PPY@PDA have significant potential

13023

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c05557
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 13022−13036

