124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 6, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Real-Time Energy Storage Management for
Renewable Integration in Microgrid: An
Off-Line Optimization Approach

Katayoun Rahbar, Student Member, IEEE, Jie Xu, Member, IEEE, and Rui Zhang, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Microgrid is a key enabling solution to future smart
grids by integrating distributed renewable generators and stor-
age systems to efﬁciently serve the local demand. However, due to
the random and intermittent characteristics of renewable energy,
new challenges arise for the reliable operation of microgrids. To
address this issue, we study in this paper the real-time energy
management for a single microgrid system that constitutes a
renewable generation system, an energy storage system, and
an aggregated load. We model the renewable energy offset by
the load over time, termed net energy proﬁle, to be practically
predictable, but with ﬁnite errors that can be arbitrarily dis-
tributed. We aim to minimize the total energy cost (modeled
as sum of time-varying strictly convex functions) of the conven-
tional energy drawn from the main grid over a ﬁnite horizon
by jointly optimizing the energy charged/discharged to/from the
storage system over time subject to practical load and storage
constraints. To solve this problem in real time, we propose a new
off-line optimization approach to devise the online algorithm. In
this approach, we ﬁrst assume that the net energy proﬁle is
perfectly predicted or known ahead of time, under which we
derive the optimal off-line energy scheduling solution in closed-
form. Next, inspired by the optimal off-line solution, we propose
a sliding-window based online algorithm for real-time energy
management under the practical setup of noisy predicted net
energy proﬁle with arbitrary errors. Finally, we conduct simula-
tions based on the real wind generation data of the Ireland power
system to evaluate the performance of our proposed algorithm,
as compared with other heuristically designed algorithms, as well
as the conventional dynamic programming based solution.

Index Terms—Convex optimization, distributed storage, energy
management, microgrid, online algorithm, renewable energy,
smart grid.

NOMENCLATURE

Indices and Numbers

i
N

Time slot index.
Total number of slots for energy scheduling.

Variables
Ci

Energy charged at time slot i.

Di
Gi
Si

REi

DEi

(cid:3)i

Energy discharged at time slot i.
Energy drawn from the main grid at time slot i.
State of the energy storage system at the beginning
of time slot i.
Renewable energy at time slot i, which comprises
of a predictable component REi and a prediction
error component δRE,i, i.e., REi = REi + δRE,i.
Demand energy at time slot i, which comprises
of a predictable component DEi and a prediction
error component δDE,i, i.e., DEi = DEi + δDE,i.
Net energy proﬁle at time slot i, which comprises
of a predictable component (cid:3)i and a prediction
error component δi, i.e., (cid:3)i = (cid:3)i + δi.

ν

i

, νi, ω Lagrange dual variables.

Charging efﬁciency of the storage system.
Discharging efﬁciency of the storage system.
Minimum storage level of the storage system.
Storage capacity.
Minimum storage level at the end of time slot N.

Constants
αc
αd
Smin
Smax
S
ai, bi, ci Cost coefﬁcients in the quadratic cost function.
M
T

Size of the sliding-window.
Given threshold in the threshold based online
algorithm.
Number of quantized levels of the storage system.
Number of independent realizations.

β
K

Functions
fi(·)

L(·)
g(·)
J(·)

function at

Conventional generation cost
slot i.
Lagrangian function.
Dual function.
Cost-to-go function in Bellman equations.

time

Manuscript

received January 16, 2014;

revised May 30, 2014 and
July 21, 2014; accepted September 6, 2014. Date of publication September 30,
2014; date of current version December 17, 2014. Paper no. TSG-00034-2014.
K. Rahbar and J. Xu are with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576 (e-mail:
k.rahbar@nus.edu.sg; elexjie@nus.edu.sg).

R. Zhang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576; and also with the
Institute for
Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore 138632 (e-mail:
elezhang@nus.edu.sg).

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSG.2014.2359004

D ISTRIBUTED renewable energy generations (such as

wind and solar) have been recognized as an environ-
mentally and economically beneﬁcial solution for future smart
grids by greatly reducing both the carbon dioxide emissions
of conventional fossil fuel based generation, and the energy
transmission losses from generators to far apart
loads. In
order to efﬁciently integrate renewable energy to the gird,
the concept of microgrids has drawn signiﬁcant interests. By

I. INTRODUCTION

1949-3053 c(cid:2) 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Adelaide. Downloaded on June 29,2024 at 09:23:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

RAHBAR et al.: REAL-TIME ENERGY STORAGE MANAGEMENT FOR RENEWABLE INTEGRATION IN MICROGRID

125

integrating and controlling a networked group of distributed
renewable generators and storage systems, each microgrid
supplies power to local users in a small geographical area more
cost-effectively. In practice, microgrids can operate either with
connection to the main grid or independently in an islanded
mode [1], depending on their renewable generation capacity
and load demand.

However, due to the random and intermittent characteristics
of practical renewable energy coupled with the uncertainty of
load demands, new challenges arise for the design of reliable
and stable operation of microgrids. For example, the mismatch
between renewable generation and load demand may lead to
demand outage (in the case of insufﬁcient renewable energy)
or result in energy waste (in the opposite case of excessive
renewable energy). To address this problem, various meth-
ods such as using supplement conventional generation [2]
and enabling energy cooperation among neighboring micro-
grids [3]–[5] have been proposed. Moreover, energy storage is
a practically appealing solution to smooth out the power ﬂuc-
tuations in the renewable energy generation, thus improving
both the reliability and efﬁciency of microgrids.

In this paper, we investigate the real-time energy manage-
ment problem for a single microgrid system consisting of a
renewable generation system, an energy storage system, and an
aggregated load. The main results of this paper are summarized
as follows.

1) We model

the renewable energy offset by the load
over time, termed net energy proﬁle, to be practically
predictable but with ﬁnite errors that can be arbitrar-
ily distributed. Under this setup, we aim to minimize
the total energy cost (modeled as sum of time-varying
strictly convex functions) of the conventional energy
drawn from the main grid over a ﬁnite horizon by jointly
optimizing the energy charged/discharged to/from the
storage system over time subject to practical load and
storage constraints.

2) To solve the formulated problem in real time, we pro-
pose a new off-line optimization approach to devise
the online algorithm. Speciﬁcally, our proposed online
algorithm is based on combining the optimal off-line
solution by assuming perfect knowledge of the net
energy proﬁle with a “sliding-window” based sequen-
tial optimization. This is in contrast to the conventional
sliding-window (or model predictive control as in [6])
based algorithm that uses dynamic programming to
solve the optimization problem within each window,
for which the prediction error of the net energy proﬁle
needs to follow a certain stochastic process with known
distribution.

3) Finally, we conduct extensive simulations based on
the real wind generation data of the Ireland power
system [7] to evaluate the performance of our proposed
algorithms. It is shown that our proposed sliding-window
based online algorithm outperforms three heuristically
designed online algorithms. Under the special case
where the energy prediction errors are modeled as a
stochastic process with known distribution, it is also
shown that our proposed online algorithm achieves a

Fig. 1. System model.

performance very close to the performance upper bound
by the optimal dynamic programming based solution for
this case.

There have been rich prior works [8]–[20] which studied the
energy management problem in power systems with renew-
able energy integration and/or energy storage. The off-line
energy management problem was studied in [8]–[13] under
the ideal assumption that the generated renewable energy and
the load demand are either deterministic or known a pri-
ori before scheduling. The prior works [14]–[18] investigated
the real-time or online energy management problem under
the stochastic demand and/or renewable energy generation
by considering either a simpliﬁed energy storage model with
inﬁnite capacity [14] or assuming a stationary stochastic
process with known distributions for the demand and/or renew-
able energy generation [15]–[18]. Furthermore, an optimal
online energy management policy was proposed in [19] solely
based on the current demand, renewable generation, and stor-
age information under a simpliﬁed time-invariant linear cost
model for conventional energy generation. Last but not least,
Fathi and Bevrani [20] studied the online energy management
problem for multiple microgrids without considering energy
storage.

In contrast to the above prior works,1 the main contribu-
tion of this paper is to devise a new online algorithm for
the real-time energy management of microgrid systems by
innovatively combining the off-line optimal solution with the
sliding-window based sequential optimization, which prac-
tically works well under arbitrary error realizations in the
net energy proﬁle. It
the con-
ventional dynamic programming approach cannot be applied
for practical scenarios where the distributions of future net
energy prediction errors are not known to the microgrid,
while our proposed online algorithm works with arbitrary error
realizations.

is worth pointing out

that

II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION

We consider a power system consisting of one main grid and
one single microgrid. The system model of our interest is thus
depicted in Fig. 1, where a microgrid is shown to connect to
the main grid and is composed of three major elements, i.e., a

1A preliminary conference version of this paper has also been presented
in [21]. As compared to [21], this paper provides more detailed proofs and dis-
cussions for our proposed solutions, and includes more substantial simulation
results to corroborate our analysis.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Adelaide. Downloaded on June 29,2024 at 09:23:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

