Gondwana Research 127 (2024) 88–99

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Gondwana Research

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / g r

Toward fostering environmental innovation in OECD countries: Do ﬁscal
decentralization, carbon pricing, and renewable energy investments
matter?
Shujaat Abbas a, Zahoor Ahmed b,c,⇑

, Avik Sinha d,e, Oleg Mariev a, Faisal Mahmood f

a Graduate School of Economics and Management, Ural Federal University, Russian Federation
b Department of Accounting and Finance, Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, Cyprus International University, Mersin 10, Haspolat 99040, Turkey
c Department of Business Administration, Faculty of Management Sciences, ILMA University, Karachi, Pakistan
d Centre for Excellence in Sustainable Development, Goa Institute of Management, India
e Adnan Kassar School of Business, Lebanese American University, Beirut 1102 2801, Lebanon
f Department of Management Sciences, Al-Hamd Islamic University, Islamabad, Pakistan

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 6 November 2022
Revised 19 January 2023
Accepted 1 March 2023
Available online 7 March 2023

Keywords:
Environmental innovation
Sustainable development
Environmental sustainability
Renewable energy investments
Fiscal decentralization

Environmental innovation is an integral part of sustainable development goal (SDG) 9. It also provides the
foundation for green energy production, and thus, indirectly supports the accomplishment of SDG 7.
Notably, the energy transition from fossil fuel to renewables is critical for achieving sustainable develop-
ment and a cleaner environment. Therefore, this study explores the major driving forces of environmental
innovation in 29 OECD countries from 1993 to 2019 by incorporating environmental taxation, carbon
pricing policy, budget for renewable energy development and demonstration, regional authority, ﬁnan-
cial development, and globalization. The recently proposed Quantile via Movements methodology is
employed to address the spiral dependence of explanatory variables and obtain results at different quan-
tiles. The ﬁndings of Quantile via movements reveal that enhancing environmental taxation and
strengthening carbon pricing policies encourage environmental innovation. Moreover, these countries
should decentralize policymaking and delegate authority to regions. Alongside this, policymaking for
encouraging the private sector budgets for renewable energy development and demonstration is neces-
sary. The stringent policy regulations at the regional level can enhance the innovation of domestic indus-
tries concerning the development, adoption, and commercial competitiveness of environment-friendly
technologies. Furthermore, the ﬁnancial sector’s development enhances environmental innovation, while
globalization needs to be properly regulated.
(cid:1) 2023 International Association for Gondwana Research. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

The unprecedented upsurge in environmental deterioration and
climatic changes pose a grave threat to this planet and human life
(Abbas, 2022; Abbas et al., 2022; Shahbaz et al., 2021; Sinha, 2017;
Sinha et al., 2022). Therefore, a major contemporary challenge for
the global community is to keep temperature rise below 2 degrees
Celsius above the pre-industrial level by 2050 (United Nations,
2022). This challenge entails almost net-zero greenhouse gases
emission. Thus, the major focus of the Sustainable Development

⇑ Corresponding author at: Department of Accounting and Finance, Faculty of
Economics and Administrative Sciences, Cyprus International University, Mersin 10,
Haspolat 99040, Turkey.

E-mail addresses: shujaat.abbass@gmail.com (S. Abbas), Zahoorahmed83@ya-

hoo.com (Z. Ahmed), f11aviks@iimidr.ac.in (A. Sinha).

Goals (SDGs) of the United Nations is to achieve sustainable and
clean economic growth. For instance, SDG-7 (affordable and clean
energy) and SDG-13 (climatic actions) urge for energy transition
toward clean sources and the adoption of various adaptative and
mitigation strategies to cope with environmental degradation
and climatic changes. Progress on these SDGs cannot be achieved
without innovation as innovation can impact both SDG-7 and
SDG-13. Hence, innovation is kept as an integral component of
SDG-9, which focuses on innovation, infrastructure, and industrial-
ization. Therefore, sustainable development requires transforming
the energy sector, industrialization, and infrastructure through
innovation.

Policymakers at

the COP26 summit urge technologically
advanced OECD countries to focus on the development of environ-
mentally friendly technologies to realize environmental and eco-
logical sustainability (OECD, 2021). The global progress on SDGs

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gr.2023.03.002
1342-937X/(cid:1) 2023 International Association for Gondwana Research. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

S. Abbas, Z. Ahmed, A. Sinha et al.

Gondwana Research 127 (2024) 88–99

is dependent on the innovative capacity of OECD countries con-
cerning environment-friendly technologies (Harrabin, 2021). Envi-
ronmental innovation depends on the efﬁcient management of
economic, social, societal, and governance drivers to facilitate tech-
nological efﬁciency and energy transition (Khan et al., 2022). For
instance, environmental taxation and carbon pricing policies can
encourage environmental innovation by increasing the cost of
carbon-intensive technologies (Saha et al., 2022). Furthermore,
the private sector budgets for renewable energy development
and demonstration (BRDD) along with ﬁnancial development and
globalization can also inﬂuences environmental innovation for
energy transition (Bilal et al., 2022). The plausible importance of
these factors in environmental sustainability and energy transition
urges for constructing a comprehensive model that could be used
to analyze their impacts on environmental
innovation. Fig. 1
depicts environmental innovation in OECD on the map while
Fig. 2 reveals that the innovative capacity of sampled OECD coun-
tries is restricted below 4 percent of total environmental innova-
the behavior of
tion. Therefore,
this study aims to model
environmental
leading
countries.

technological

innovations

in global

The prior empirical studies have mainly focused on determi-
nants of environmental degradation along with exploring the
impacts of environmental innovation on the environment and cli-
matic conditions (Bilal et al., 2022; Hassan et al., 2023, 2022a,
2022b; Mongo et al., 2021; Tauseef Hassan et al., 2022). However,
insufﬁcient investigations have focused on drivers of environmen-
tal innovation. Among these works, literature that focuses on ﬁrm-
level drivers for environmental innovation, following the Porter
(1991) hypothesis, urges for the imposition of environmental reg-
ulations to enhance innovative efﬁciency and commercial compet-
itiveness (Bauer et al., 2012; Blind, 2012; Horbach, 2008; Liao et al.,

2018). While, the aggregate country or regional-level studies on
drivers of environmental innovation have focused mainly on envi-
ronmental regulations, environmental taxation, and gender bias
(Horbach, 2008; Irfan et al., 2022; Saha et al., 2022). Prior literature
has largely overlooked the impacts of carbon pricing policy, budget
for renewable energy development and demonstration (BRDD), ﬁs-
cal decentralization, ﬁnancial development, and globalization on
environmental innovation.

Therefore, this research increases the scope of available litera-
ture by including these important drivers to explain environmental
innovation in OECD countries. The major research questions are
summarized below.

What are the major drivers of environmental innovation across

OECD countries?

Several strains of factors motivated authors to conduct this
econometric inquiry. First, the shift from fossil fuel to clean energy,
which comprises three stages: invention, innovation, and diffusion,
is crucial to address environmental deterioration and related cli-
matic changes (Saha et al., 2022). This process of the energy tran-
sition is dependent on the innovative capacity of advanced
countries in the OECD (OECD, 2020). Given the urgency of the clean
energy transition, OECD countries have implemented numerous
policy measures to foster environmental innovation, such as the
imposition of taxes on environmental emissions and the adoption
of a carbon pricing policy. The imposition of environmental taxa-
tion and carbon pricing can enhance environmental innovation
by increasing the cost of environment-polluting industries/tech-
nologies. Second, the development of new technologies requires
considerable budgetary allocation for research and development
activities. The private sector BRDD plays a very important role in
the development of renewable energy technologies. Moreover,
the ﬁndings of Lee and Min (2015) reveal that the BRDD can con-

Fig. 1. Environmental innovation in selected OECD countries.

89

