Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rser 

Data-driven probabilistic machine learning in sustainable smart energy/ 
smart energy systems: Key developments, challenges, and future research 
opportunities in the context of smart grid paradigm 

Tanveer Ahmad a, *, Rafal Madonski a, Dongdong Zhang b, Chao Huang c,d, Asad Mujeeb e 
a Energy and Electricity Research Center, International Energy College, Jinan University, Zhuhai, Guangdong Province, 519070, China 
b School of Electrical Engineering, Guangxi University, Nanning, 530004, China 
c School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, 10083, China 
d Shunde Graduate School, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Guangdong, 528399, China 
e Department of Electrical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, PR China   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Data-driven probabilistic machine learning 
Energy distribution 
Discovery and design of energy materials 
Big data analytics and smart grid 
Strategic energy planning and smart 
manufacturing 
Energy demand-side response 

The current trend indicates that energy demand and supply will eventually be controlled by autonomous soft-
ware that optimizes decision-making and energy distribution operations. New state-of-the-art machine learning 
(ML) technologies are integral in optimizing decision-making in energy distribution networks and systems. This 
study was conducted on data-driven probabilistic ML techniques and their real-time applications to smart energy 
systems and networks to highlight the urgency of this area of research. This study focused on two key areas: i) the 
use of ML in core energy technologies and ii) the use cases of ML for energy distribution utilities. The core energy 
technologies include the use of ML in advanced energy materials, energy systems and storage devices, energy 
efficiency,  smart  energy  material  manufacturing  in  the  smart  grid  paradigm,  strategic  energy  planning,  inte-
gration of renewable energy, and big data analytics in the smart grid environment. The investigated ML area in 
energy distribution systems includes energy consumption and price forecasting, the merit order of energy price 
forecasting, and the consumer lifetime value. Cybersecurity topics for power delivery and utilization, grid edge 
systems and distributed energy resources, power transmission, and distribution systems are also briefly studied. 
The primary goal of this work was to identify common issues useful in future studies on ML for smooth energy 
distribution operations. This study was concluded with many energy perspectives on significant opportunities 
and challenges. It is noted that if the smart ML automation is used in its targeting energy systems, the utility 
sector and energy industry could potentially save from $237 billion up to $813 billion.   

1. Introduction 

Today, while countries seek to restructure their energy strategies and 
make cleaner energy more dependent, one major challenge remains [1]. 
Both  wind  and  solar  power  are,  by  definition,  intermittent  nature  of 
sources  of  electricity  [2].  The  power  output  of  a  solar  panel  or  wind 
turbine is never constant; it is determined by external variables such as 
cloud cover intensity, solar radiation, and wind speed, all of which are 
uncontrollable [3]. When wind and solar farms generate less electricity, 
grid operators must switch to traditional power plants to balance energy 
supply and demand. Alternatively, after 90% of their electricity needs 
for the day have been met on windy and sunny days, operators must 
decrease gas-fired and coal power plant production to prevent a power 

overload allowing the whole grid to suffocate or be damaged. Grid op-
erators have to compensate energy providers for making changes to their 
supplies (i.e., power system infrastructure), saving German consumers, 
for example, about $553 million a year [4]. 

Besides, electric utilities generate excessive carbon dioxide emissions 
when their excess electricity is dissipated [5]. All this contributes to the 
complexities  of  accurately  forecasting  the  industry’s  health  status  of 
energy distribution infrastructure. In general, keeping the demand and 
supply  of  energy  balanced  will  turn  into  a  constant  operational  and 
technological struggle. This leads us to the potential that ML has and to 
the major impact it could have on the energy spectrum as a whole [6]. 
Even  though  ML  is  in  its  early  stages  of  deployment,  it  could  funda-
mentally transform how we communicate with resources [7]. Its effect 
could be far-reaching in renewable energy distribution and forecasts and 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail addresses: tanveer.ahmad.pk11@gmail.com, tanveerahma@jnu.edu.cn (T. Ahmad).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112128 
Received 23 March 2021; Received in revised form 5 December 2021; Accepted 10 January 2022   

RenewableandSustainableEnergyReviews160(2022)112128Availableonline5March20221364-0321/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.T. Ahmad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Abbreviations 

Machine learning 
ML 
TWh 
Terawatt-hours 
REmap  Renewable energy map 
Photovoltaics 
PV 
Return on investment 
ROI 
Department of Energy 
DOE 
International Business Machines 
IBM 
ASEA Brown Boveri 
ABB 
British Petroleum 
BP 
Artificial intelligence 
AI 
Support vector machine 
SVM 
Convolution neural networks 
CNN 
Deep belief neural networks 
DBNN 
Deep Boltzmann machine 
DBM 
Recurrent neural networks 
RNN 
Deep reinforcement learning 
DRL 
Short for long-range 
LoRa 
Point of common coupling 
PCC 

the implementation of smart grids. 

The aim and objective of this study: Right now, ML is considered a “hot 
topic” in a variety of research fields, and it is currently the most rapidly 
developing sector in high-tech. Data processing and interpretation are 
becoming  increasingly  important,  even  for  engineers,  due  to  energy 
digitalization. Smart grids are a term used to describe various new data- 
based  services  in  renewable  energy  supply,  marketing,  storage,  and 
usage.  This  study  covers  recent  advances  and  fundamental  ML  tech-
niques in energy distribution. ML assists in the fast and efficient pro-
cessing of this data in energy distribution (e.g., the energy distribution is 
the last stage of energy delivery, it carries out the energy from trans-
mission  systems,  conventional  grid  or  smart  grid  infrastructure,  indi-
vidual consumers, transmission and distribution infrastructure, energy 
devices and materials, big data analytics, etc.). To start, we identify the 
numerous  potential  challenges  that  ML  tries  to  solve,  review  recent 
advances in the field, and analyze ML’s effect on the energy sector. The 
introduction  of  different  ML  model  classes  to  solve  such  complex 
problems is briefly examined. Eight various aspects of ML in core energy 
technologies are discussed. Five use cases of ML in energy distribution 
are briefly covered. The used software for ML models in energy distri-
bution, challenges, ML opportunities towards a smart and sustainable 
future, and recent progress on discovery and properties of ML models 
aim to strengthen the core theme of this study. 

The  Framework  and  Structure  of  this  Study:  The  description  of  the 
performed study has been arranged into eight sections. The paper opens 
with a general introduction of the study, including four subsections. The 
process of energy conversion (supporting shift towards 100% renewable 
energy) is discussed in the first subsection. The main idea and concept of 
ML,  historical  overview  of  ML  methods,  list  of  ML  models  and  their 
usage in the smart energy systems, as well as the role of ML in the dis-
tribution of energy are described in Sects. 1.2 to 1.5, respectively. Then, 
Sect. 2 follows the core concept of energy technologies using ML, which 
discusses the use of ML in various areas. The use of ML for energy dis-
tribution  utilities  is  elaborated  in  Sect.  3,  with  its  five  subsections 
dedicated to accurate energy price forecasting, keeping the merit order 
of accurate energy prices, predicting consumer life values, probability 
assessment of winning consumers, and making good offers to the energy 
consumers. Sect. 4 highlights various uses of ML tools for energy dis-
tribution systems and introduces different software used by organiza-
tions that deal with ML techniques. Sect. 5 describes the analysis of the 
existing challenges of ML in the context of energy distribution systems. 
We  then  go  on  to  identify  ML  opportunities  towards  a  smart  and 

Home energy management 
Electric vehicles 
Energy storage system 
Renewable energy source 
The United States of America 
Active building energy performance contracting 
Carbon dioxide 
The United States dollar 
Internet of Things 

HEM 
EV 
ESS 
RES 
US 
AEPC 
CO2 
USD 
IoT 
SCADA  Supervisory control and data acquisition control system 
RTUs 
GIS 
CLV/LTV Consumer lifetime value 
TEASER  Energy analysis and simulation for efficient retrofit 
RL 
EDLC 
SMES 
V2G 
TESS 

Reinforcement learning 
Electric double-layer capacitors 
Superconducting magnetic energy storage 
Vehicle-to-grid 
Thermal energy storage system  

Remote terminal unit 
Geographic information system 

sustainable future in Sect. 6. Recent progress on properties and discov-
ery  of  ML  is  described  in  Sect.  7.  Finally,  Sect.  8  concluded  the  con-
ducted study. 

Fig. 1 shows the results of an analysis of search queries on ML in the 
subject area, article type, and area of research in engineering and energy 
distribution. The analysis is divided into three major parts: including i) 
document by subject area on ML models (e.g., published research arti-
cles in all areas of research but with the use of ML models), ii) document 
by subject area on ML in engineering (e.g., published research articles in 
the engineering field); iii) and document by subject area on ML in en-
gineering and energy (e.g., published research articles in the engineer-
ing field, particularly in energy). Overall, the United States is leading in 
publishing  research  articles  in  all  fields.  China  is  number  one  in  the 
World  for  publishing  research  articles  in  the  engineering  and  energy 
fields. Fig. 1 shows the data clusters result from Scopus. 

1.1. Energy conversation: moving 100% towards clean and renewable 
energy 

Globally, a total of 376 TW-hours (TWh) of renewable energy was 
produced in 2018, a rise of 6.1% relative to the previous year (2017) [8]. 
Wind and solar production rose by 11% and 28%, respectively, in 2018 
[8].  In  2018,  Asia  accounted  for  much  of  the  increase  in  renewable 
energy production, increasing generation by a total of 219 TWh. Asia’s 
volume of world renewable generation also rose, increasing to 40% of 
overall renewable generation. North America and Europe together hold 
40% of the shares, led by Eurasia (5%) and South America (12%) [8]. 
The United States’  clean energy initiative is becoming more asser-
tive:  more  groups  target  a  rise  in  renewable  energy  use  and  carbon 
emissions decrease [9]. Many states have recently declared a target to 
increase their current renewable portfolio requirements to incorporate a 
100%  renewable  energy  standard  (e.g.,  New  Mexico,  Washington, 
Nevada, and Colorado) [10]. A rising number of power companies are 
now  making  enormous  commitments  to  reduce  greenhouse  emissions 
and increase sustainable energy usage [11]. At least ten publicly listed 
utility  companies  have  declared  100%  decarbonization  targets,  and  a 
large portion of these utilities have established goals to minimize carbon 

RenewableandSustainableEnergyReviews160(2022)1121282