Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rser 

Optimal day-ahead large-scale battery dispatch model for multi-regulation 
participation considering full timescale uncertainties 

Mingze Zhang a, Weidong Li a, *, Samson Shenglong Yu b, Haixia Wang a, Yu Ba a 
a School of Electrical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China 
b School of Engineering, Deakin University, Melbourne, Victoria, 3216, Australia   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Day-ahead scheduling 
Large-scale batteries 
Power system economics 
Power system reliability 
Power system reserve 
Renewable energy systems 

Grid scale battery integration plays an important role in renewable energy integration and the formation of smart 
grid. To mitigate the problems of insufficient frequency response and peak regulation capacities faced by modern 
power grids with high wind energy uptake, a day-ahead optimization dispatch strategy considering operational 
risks is proposed in this study. In the day-ahead dispatch model, generation units and a large-scale battery energy 
storage  station  (LS-BESS)  are  coordinated  to  participate  in  multi-type  frequency  control  ancillary  services 
(FCASs). For optimal performance, scheduling in different timescales and the complementarity between power 
and  energy  types  of  requirements  are  coordinated,  with  various  service  uncertainties  considered.  Then  the 
conditional  value-at-risk  theory  is  utilized  to  achieve  the  optimal  mix  of  multiple  resources  for  day-ahead 
regulation  reserves,  to  realize  the  minimum  operation  cost.  To  tackle  the  uncertainty  of  wind  power  over  a 
large timescale, a robust optimization (RO) approach based on the budget uncertainty set is employed, which 
considers robustness and economy. This can help avoid over-conservation of the standard RO and enhance the 
applicability of the decisions made. Simulation studies and comparison analysis of multiple schemes verify the 
effectiveness  of  the  proposed  optimal  day-ahead  dispatch  strategy,  which  also  demonstrate  that  a  LS-BESS 
participating in multiple FCASs for day-ahead dispatch can help realize secure, reliable, and economic power 
grid.   

1. Introduction 

Active power regulations in power systems are coordinated by FCASs 
at different timescales, including inertia frequency response (IFR) and 
PFR on the timescale of tens of seconds to ensure security, SFR on the 
timescale of a few minutes to improve quality, and hourly peak regu-
lation to achieve power balance. With growing penetration of renewable 
energy  and  gradual  decommission  of  conventional  generation  units, 
some issues have arisen for FCASs: 1) power system’s IFR and PFR are 
weakened  [1,2],  so  its  resilience  to  resist  step  disturbances  is  dimin-
ished, and the risk of load shedding is increased; 2) SFR is weakened [3], 
which reduces the flexibility of the power system to deal with load and 
wind power fluctuations, leading to possible frequency instability; and 
3) the anti-peak regulation characteristic of wind power [4] deteriorates 
the  downward  peak  shaving  capacity  [5],  and  wind  energy  has  high 
uncertainty,  which  make  the  wind  power  curtailment  remain  signifi-
cant, resulting in low wind energy utilization. If these problems are not 
properly solved, the security of operations cannot be well maintained, 

and the reliability and cost-effectiveness of the power system cannot be 
optimized. 

As an effective means to realize the time-sequence shift of power and 
energy,  an  energy  storage  system  can  enhance  the  peak  regulation 
capability of the power system, to achieve peak load shifting [6] and 
store surplus wind power [7]. For a storage device with fast response, it 
can  also  participate  in  FFR,  PFR,  and  SFR  [8]  through  charging  and 
discharging, to improve the frequency regulation capability of the power 
system and improve the frequency security and reliability. Among many 
energy storage devices, a modern battery energy storage station (BESS) 
is a type of storage with fast response [9,10], which therefore can alle-
viate  the  above-mentioned  FCASs  problems  [11,12].  Technological 
maturity and reduced costs of batteries have welcomed its wide appli-
cation in power systems. In the context of the increasingly prominent 
FCASs problem, batteries systems are considered a promising means of 
energy storage. In particular, an LS-BESS with a comparable scale of a 
typical  generation  unit,  can  play  a  better  role  as  the  proportion  of 
non-dispatchable  renewable  energy  resources  keeps  increasing  in  the 
power  grid,  leading  to  increasingly  less  active  power  regulation 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: wdli@dlut.edu.cn (W. Li).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2023.113963 
Received 23 March 2022; Received in revised form 28 August 2023; Accepted 18 October 2023   

RenewableandSustainableEnergyReviews189(2024)113963Availableonline7November20231364-0321/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.M. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Nomenclature 

Pmax
g,i

, Pmin

g,i Maximum and minimum power output of generation unit i 

Cop, Cre, Crisk Operation, reserve, and risk costs of the system in the 

+
g,i, V

V

(cid:0)
g,i  Ramp-up and ramp-down limits of generation unit i (MW 

whole dispatch day ($) 

g,i,t, Ce
Cb

g,i,t Startup and shutdown costs of generation unit i in period t 

B,t, Pdis
Pch

B,t  Charging and discharging power of LS-BESS in period t 

($) 
Production cost of generation unit i in period t ($) 

(MW) 

Pmax
B , Erated

B

Rated power and energy capacities of LS-BESS (MW and 

(MW) 

per time step) 

Cge
g,i,t 
CDPR
g,i,t 

cSFR
g 

Rload
1,t 

ui,t 

vt 

Pg,i,t 

Deep peak regulation cost of generation unit i in period t 
($) 
B , cSFR

Unit compensation costs of participating in fast 

B

B , cPFR
cFFR

frequency regulation (FFR), primary frequency response 
(PFR), and secondary frequency regulation (SFR) for a LS- 
BESS ($/MWh) 
Unit compensation cost of participating in SFR for a 
generation unit ($/MWh) 
The under-frequency load shedding (UFLS) loss in period t 
($) 

cload, cW  Unit loss costs of load curtailment and wind energy 

curtailment ($/MWh) 
Binary variable: “1” if generation unit i is ON in period t, 
and “0” otherwise 
Binary variable: “1” if LS-BESS is discharging in period t, 
and “0” otherwise 
Power output of generation unit i in period t (MW) 

MWh) 
Energy capacity of LS-BESS in period t (MWh) 

EB,t 
ηch, ηdis  Charging and discharging rates of LS-BESS 
SoCini
B 

State of charge (SoC) of LS-BESS in the initial period of the 
dispatch day 
Power shortage or deficiency within period t (MW) 
Equivalent inertia time constant of the system in period t 
(s) 
Droop coefficient of generation unit i (MW/Hz) 

Virtual regulation coefficient of LS-BESS participating in 
FFR in period t (MWs/Hz) 
Virtual droop coefficient of LS-BESS in period t (MW/Hz) 
Proportion of the high-frequency components of frequency 
fluctuations in period t 
Minimum spinning reserve rate required by the system 
Pre-specified frequency limit to trigger the UFLS relay (Hz)  

ΔPL,t 
HS,t 

KPFR
g,i 
KFFR
B,t 

KPFR
B,t 
HFt 

γ 
f min 

resources.  Having  the  combined  advantages  of  power-type  and 
energy-type storage components, a LS-BESS can provide peak regulation 
with  energy  demand  and  SFR  service  for  both  power  and  energy  in 
normal operations, and can be used as an emergency regulation resource 
for FFR and PFR after a large step disturbance to ensure frequency sta-
bility.  For  a  LS-BESS  to  effectively  participate  in  multi-regulations, 
optimal day-ahead dispatch for a power system with the LS-BESS and 
wind energy is required. The main goal of the day-ahead dispatch is to 
determine  the  next-day  generation units’  scheduling  and  spinning  re-
serves  needed,  so  that  the  multi-regulations  can be  satisfied,  and  fre-
quency stability can be guaranteed by the orchestrated energy resources. 
This has motivated this research. 

Currently,  some  studies  have  considered  a  BESS  as  a  means  of 
providing FCAS for a power system, and we have briefly summarized 
them. From the analytical perspective of this study, BESSs can be clas-
sified into two categories: direct and non-direct dispatch BESSs. Non- 
direct-dispatch of BESSs means that the BESSs cannot be directly dis-
patched by bulk power grid operators due to their small capacities, and 
their participation in one or more types of FCASs is generally based on 
some response incentive mechanisms [9,13,14] or aggregated in virtual 
power plants [15,16] to participate in power system ancillary services. 
The operational strategies for this type of BESSs are developed by the 
BESS control center or the virtual power plant control center from their 
own perspectives. 

In other words, the operation and control of the above-mentioned 
BESSs are not directly dispatched by bulk power grid operators. They 
are  either  autonomously  adjusted  according  to  the  frequency  control 
signal or coordinated by the aggregators or collaborative power gener-
ation operators. Therefore, the operation strategies of participating in 
FCASs  are  not  applicable  to  directly  dispatched  BESSs.  While  some 
studies involve BESSs that are directly dispatched by grid operators, they 
focus on determining the optimal bidding strategies for BESSs in multi- 
type  FCASs  participation.  For  example,  studies  in  Refs.  [17–19]  pro-
posed a control strategy and optimal clearing scheduling method of a 
BESS  to  participate  in  the  PFR  and  energy  markets  to  realize  high 
profitability under the day-ahead electricity market mechanism. These 
studies  reflect  BESS-centric  decision-making,  which  is  not  a  holistic 

method for bulk grid operators’ system-wide decisions. 

For a BESS that can be directly dispatched by bulk power grid op-
erators,  its  unexpected  actions  outside  the  dispatch  expectation  may 
have a massive impact on the power grid, due to its large power and 
energy capacity. Therefore, a LS-BESS should be managed through the 
central power dispatch from a holistic perspective of power grid oper-
ations. However, there are only a few research attempts on how to fully 
utilize its advantage and complement a LS-BESS and other sources. This 
is  an  especially  important  research  direction  to  realize  a  suitable 
dispatch scheme of grid-scale LS-BESS-incorporated power systems. If a 
LS-BESS only provides a single service, it is not conducive to realizing its 
full regulation potential and short-term return on investment. Therefore, 
a LS-BESS should participate in multi-regulation services in the power 
system  to  better  serve  the  grid  operations.  Studies  in  Refs.  [17–21] 
consider one or two types of regulations, but have not involved the co-
ordination of various FCASs at the full timescale in daily operations, or 
considered the potential operational risk of the power grid. Therefore, it 
is hard to achieve better coordination among secure, reliable, and eco-
nomic power grid operations. 

For day-ahead dispatch strategies of wind-energy-integrated power 
grids with a LS-BESS, it is necessary to consider the uncertainty of wind 
power output [22], which requires an appropriate stochastic optimiza-
tion  approach.  The  chance-constrained  programming  reported  in 
Ref.  [23]  accepts  optimization  decisions  that  do  not  meet  the  con-
straints,  but  within  a  certain  range.  This  may  lead  to  the  day-ahead 
optimization results unsuitable for the grid operations in the dispatch 
day. The scenario-based stochastic programming model in Ref. [24] can 
obtain  a  dispatch  scheme  that  considers  the  actual  characteristics  of 
each  typical  scenario,  which  is  generally  applicable  to  the  situations 
where  the  actual  probability  distribution  of  the  uncertainties  can  be 
effectively obtained. Under the condition of unknown probability, the 
RO method [25,26] shows great advantages, and the obtained optimi-
zation  strategy  is  effective  for  any  scenario  in  the  uncertainty  set. 
However,  the  decisions  resulting  from  the  standard  RO  are  usually 
overly conservative, leading to limited profitability. The RO approach 
based on the budget uncertainty set can improve this problem [27,28], 
and it is favored by some studies. The uncertainty set is generated by 

RenewableandSustainableEnergyReviews189(2024)1139632