Excellence in Energy

Sodium-Ion Battery Materials and Electrochemical 
Properties Reviewed

Kudakwashe Chayambuka, Grietus Mulder, Dmitri L. Danilov, and Peter H. L. Notten*

The demand for electrochemical energy storage technologies is rapidly 
increasing due to the proliferation of renewable energy sources and the 
emerging markets of grid-scale battery applications. The properties of 
batteries are ideal for most electrical energy storage (EES) needs, yet, faced 
with resource constraints, the ability of current lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) to 
match this overwhelming demand is uncertain. Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) 
are a novel class of batteries with similar performance characteristics to LIBs. 
Since they are composed of earth-abundant elements, cheaper and utility 
scale battery modules can be assembled. As a result of the learning curve in 
the LIB technology, a phenomenal progression in material development has 
been realized in the SIB technology. In this review, innovative strategies used 
in SIB material development, and the electrochemical properties of anode, 
cathode, and electrolyte combinations are elucidated. Attractive performance 
characteristics are herein evidenced, based on comparative gravimetric and 
volumetric energy densities to state-of-the-art LIBs. In addition, opportunities 
and challenges toward commercialization are herein discussed based on 
patent data trend analysis. With extensive industrial adaptations expected, 
the commercial prospects of SIBs look promising and this once discarded 
technology is set to play a major role in EES applications.

1. Introduction

Following  the  successful  commercialization  of  lithium-ion 
batteries  (LIBs)  by  the  Sony  corporation  in  1991,[1]  LIB  have 

K. Chayambuka, G. Mulder
VITO
Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium
K. Chayambuka, G. Mulder
EnergyVille
Thor Park 8310, 3600 Genk, Belgium
K. Chayambuka, Dr. D. L. Danilov, Prof. P. H. L. Notten
Eindhoven University of Technology
Postbus 513, 5600 MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
E-mail: p.h.l.notten@tue.nl
Dr. D. L. Danilov, Prof. P. H. L. Notten
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Fundamental Electrochemistry (IEK-9)
D-52425 Jülich, Germany
Prof. P. H. L. Notten
University of Technology Sydney
Broadway, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia

The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201800079.

DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201800079

become  the  electricity  storage  system  of 
choice  over  the  past  26  years,  combining 
superb energy density, compact and light-
weight designs, and outstanding cycle life 
compared  to  other  rechargeable  battery 
technologies.[2]

Despite  the  commercial  success  and 
proliferation  of  LIB  in  consumer  elec-
tronics  and  recently  in  battery  electric 
vehicles, LIBs are believed to be too expen-
sive  for  stationary,  large-scale,  electrical 
energy  storage  (EES)  and,  in  addition, 
there  are  concerns  on  the  resource  avail-
ability of LIB components.[3,4] Historically, 
the  technology  of  choice  for  EES  applica-
tions  is  pumped-hydro  which  continues 
to  dominate  due  to  very  large  unit  sizes, 
accounting for over 95% of the total rated 
power  globally  (data  derived  from  the  US 
DOE,  global  energy  storage  database).[5,6] 
However,  the  number  of  new  pumped-
hydro installations is dwindling as a result 
of  its  specific  geographic  and  geological 
requirements.[7]  A  technological  incentive 
is therefore to find alternative EES options 
that are installation flexible, cost effective, 
energy efficient, and environmentally benign in order to match 
the rapid growth in intermittent renewable energy sources.

The  properties  of  electrochemical  energy  storage  technolo-
gies are, in general, ideal for a grid scale EES. LIBs in particular 
have the ability to respond rapidly to load changes, have a high 
energy  density  combined  with  an  excellent  Coulombic  effi-
ciency,  exhibit  low  standby  losses,  and  have  modular  designs 
that facilitate upscaling.[7,8] Yet, faced with the aforementioned 
resource  constraints  and  adverse  ecological  hazards  upon 
disposal  (due  to  toxic  elements),  the  ability  of  LIBs  to  meet 
large-scale EES demands, remains uncertain.[7] The needs and 
challenges  outlined  above  have  motivated  the  research  for  an 
alternative,  scalable  battery  technology,  composed  of  cheap, 
abundant,  and environmentally benign  materials  to match  the 
performance and economical success of LIBs.

Given  the  relative  abundance  of  elemental  sodium  (com-
pared  to  lithium  in  the  Earth’s  crust,  see  Figure  1)  and  the 
low  electrochemical  potential  of  Na  (−2.71  V  vs  the  standard 
hydrogen electrode, SHE), which is only 330 mV above that of 
Li, rechargeable batteries based on sodium hold great promise 
to  meet  large-scale  EES  demands.  For  example,  high-tempera-
ture ZEBRA cells[9] based on the Na/NiCl2 system and sodium 
sulfur  cells[10]  have  already  demonstrated  the  potential  of 
sodium-based  electrochemical  energy  storage.  These  batteries 

Adv. Energy Mater. 2018, 8, 1800079

1800079  (1 of 49)

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.advenergymat.deReviewstorage systems such as Li-ion and NiMH batteries using 
MATLAB and COMSOL Multiphysics.

automotive applications like plugin hybrid vehicles and also 
for the integration of photovoltaic energy in a smart grid 
network. He also works on electrochemical modeling of bat-
teries with the help of the COMSOL Multiphysics software.

Kudakwashe Chayambuka 
is a researcher at Energy 
Technology unit (ETE) of 
the Flemish Institute for 
Technological Research 
(VITO) and is Ph.D. candidate 
at the Technical University 
of Eindhoven (TU/e) Faculty 
of Electrical Engineering. He 
focuses on the electrochem-
ical modeling of sodium-ion 
batteries and other energy 

Grietus Mulder is researcher 
at the Flemish Technological 
Institute VITO in the unit 
Energy Technology with 
a background in applied 
physics. He specializes in 
the field of electrical energy 
storage for automotive and 
renewable energy applications. 
He developed battery testing 
methods and software mar-
keted as “BATAL,” used for 

Peter H. L. Notten joined 
Philips Research Laboratories 
(Eindhoven, The Netherlands) 
from 1975 to 2010. He 
received his Ph.D. degree 
from Eindhoven University in 
1989. Since then he focused 
on energy storage research, 
including hydrogen and 
lithium storage materials, 
new battery technologies, 
mod eling electrochemical 

systems, and design of battery-management algorithms. In 
2000 he was appointed as professor at TU/e where he now 
heads the group Energy Materials and Devices. In 2014 
he has been appointed as International Adjunct Faculty 
at Amrita University, Coimbatore (India), as group leader 
at Forschungszentrum Ju˝lich (Germany), and in 2018 as 
honorary professor at University of Technology Sydney.

therefore  complement  LIBs  in  stationary  and  large-scale  appli-
cations. This is further expected to stabilize the costs of lithium-
based batteries as they enter the mass market of electric vehicles 
by  suppressing  Li,  Co,  and  Cu  resource  constraints.  In  this  

Figure 1.  Abundance of elements in the Earth’s crust. The energy carrying 
elements  for  comparison  are  highlighted  in  red  for  Na  and  blue  for  Li. 
Adapted with permission.[17] Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.

have  already  been  commercialized  for  stationary  and  automo-
tive  applications.[11–14]  Their  major  disadvantage,  however,  is  a 
high  operating  temperature  of  ≈300  °C,  which  conjures  safety 
hazards  and  reduces  the  round  trip  energy  efficiency  of  the 
cells.[12,14]  A  room  temperature  battery  therefore  remains  the 
only viable option to match the performance and characteristics 
of state-of-the-art LIBs.

The revival of room temperature sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), 
based  on  intercalation  materials  analogous  to  the  current  LIB 
technology,  has  thus  emerged  as  a  promising  strategy.  Revival 
because up until the late 1980s, SIBs were fervently researched 
alongside LIBs.[15,16] The discovery of graphite as a cheap, elec-
trochemically  active  and  high-capacity  anode  in  LIB,  and  the 
failure  of  sodium  insertion  in  graphite,  resulted  in  the  near 
abandonment of the research in Na intercalation materials for 
SIB application.[17] A decade later, in the year 2000, Stevens and 
Dahn[18]  reported  the  successful  electrochemical  insertion  of 
sodium in hard carbon (HC), at a specific capacity close to that 
of lithium in graphite (≈372 mAh g−1). This discovery, coupled 
with a growing need of a complementary technology to the LIB 
became a major turning point in the rejuvenated interest in the 
SIB concept.

Since this discovery, the SIBs have increasingly gained trac-
tion,  buoyed  by  further  discoveries  in  anodic  and  cathodic 
materials. Much of this rapid progress in material development 
is attributed to the similarities between SIBs and LIBs. Funda-
mentally, the voltage range and operating principles of the SIBs 
and  LIBs  are  identical.  This  similarity  has  allowed  the  years 
of  conceptual  understanding  and  development  in  LIBs  to  be 
directly transferred, thereby allowing a rapid growth in the SIB 
technology.  Besides  borrowing  from  material  synthesis  routes, 
the  same  production  lines  used  to  manufacture  LIB  cells  can 
be used to make SIB cells without any modification.[19] Several 
companies  such  as  Faradion  (UK)[20]  and  Sumitomo[21]  (Japan) 
have  thus  announced  plans  to  commercialize  SIBs,  the  latter 
having initially disclosed plans to start mass production as early 
as 2016.[22]

Although  SIBs  are  not  projected  to  compete  with  LIBs  for 
volumetric and gravimetric energy density, they are expected to 
leverage  their  resource  abundance  to  be  price  competitive  and 

Adv. Energy Mater. 2018, 8, 1800079

1800079  (2 of 49)

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.advenergymat.dewww.advancedsciencenews.com 16146840, 2018, 16, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aenm.201800079 by University Of Adelaide, Wiley Online Library on [29/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License