Applied Energy 197 (2017) 1–13

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Applied Energy

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / a p e n e r g y

Dealing with multiple decades of hourly wind and PV time series in
energy models: A comparison of methods to reduce time resolution and
the planning implications of inter-annual variability

Climate Policy Group, Department of Environmental Systems Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Stefan Pfenninger

h i g h l i g h t s

(cid:1) Comparison of resampling, clustering, and heuristics to reduce model time resolution.
(cid:1) Suitable approach depends on input data and model constraint setup.
(cid:1) Heuristic approaches appear more stable than statistical clustering.
(cid:1) Results with high renewable shares but few years of input data are unreliable.
(cid:1) Better modeling and planning methods needed to deal with inter-year variability.

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 5 October 2016
Received in revised form 3 February 2017
Accepted 10 March 2017
Available online 4 April 2017

Keywords:
High-resolution energy modeling
Time series data
Variable renewable generation
Modeling methods

Using a high-resolution planning model of the Great Britain power system and 25 years of simulated
wind and PV generation data, this study compares different methods to reduce time resolution of energy
models to increase their computational tractability: downsampling, clustering, and heuristics. By com-
paring model results in terms of costs and installed capacities across different methods, this study shows
that the best method depends heavily on input data and the setup of model constraints. This implies that
there is no one-size-ﬁts-all approach to the problem of time step reduction, but heuristic approaches
appear promising. In addition, the 25 years of time series demonstrate considerable inter-year variability
in wind and PV power output. This further complicates the problem of time detail in energy models as it
suggests long time series are necessary. Model results with high shares of PV and wind generation using a
single or few years of data are likely unreliable. Better modeling and planning methods are required to
determine robust scenarios with high shares of variable renewables. The methods are implemented in
the freely available open-source modeling framework Calliope.
(cid:1) 2017 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

1. Introduction

Energy system models were ﬁrst developed in the 1970s by the
International Energy Agency (IEA) and the International Institute
for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in the aftermath of the inter-
national oil crisis. Using optimization methods, in particular linear
programming, they allowed analysts to structure their assump-
tions and data, forming them into internally coherent scenarios
of how energy is extracted, converted, transported, and used, and
how these processes might change in the future. Today, with the
increasing deployment of variable renewable generation, the glo-
bal energy system is again undergoing a fundamental transition.
Global installed wind power capacity reached about 417 GW in

2015, up from 17 GW in 2000, while solar photovoltaics (PV) has
experienced an even higher growth rate, with capacity rising from
below 1 GW in 2000 to 222 GW in 2015 globally [1]. Energy mod-
els are important decision-making aids to help navigate the trans-
formation of the current fossil-fuel based energy system to one
based on clean and renewable energy [2].

In this context, the rising importance of variable renewable
generation has presented two crucial and related problems to
energy modelers. The ﬁrst problem is procuring data on the
generation potential for wind and PV power with sufﬁcient resolu-
tion in space and time, then integrating this data into power sys-
tem models such as LIMES-EU [3] or larger energy system
models such as TIMES and TIAM [4]. Having data with temporal
resolution of one hour or better allows a model to depict the
hour-by-hour and day-by-day ﬂuctuations in power output from

E-mail address: stefan.pfenninger@usys.ethz.ch

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.03.051
0306-2619/(cid:1) 2017 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

2

S. Pfenninger / Applied Energy 197 (2017) 1–13

these technologies, how they correlate with each other and with
power demand [5]. The second problem pertains to the inter-
annual variability of renewable generation, which requires many
years of data to fully address. Recent work has started to address
the ﬁrst problem but in the main, studies are limited to a single
or a small number of years [6–9]. The provision of longer time ser-
ies requires input data ideally spanning multiple decades. This is
becoming possible through the use of global reanalysis data for
energy modeling [10,11].

Both of these problems overlap in one crucial area: for large
models to be computationally tractable, it is often not feasible
for them to include full hourly time series for an entire year,
let alone for several decades. This is primarily due to the
computational requirements of running what are often linear or
mixed-integer optimization models. Work has started to emerge
investigating ways to reduce the number of time steps in models
while retaining relevant detail, primarily by using statistical
clustering methods to derive a set of typical days or weeks from
a larger input time series, then feeding those days into an energy
model [12–15]. However, there are well-known limitations to sta-
tistical clustering methods, including the fact that most methods
produce clusters even in homogeneous datasets, and that clusters
must be validated and their stability assessed [16]. This implies
that approaches may vary in performance in different years, and
that speciﬁc approaches are more or less suitable depending on
the structure of the underlying model.

This paper treats this problem systematically, by examining dif-
ferent techniques to reduce the time resolution of energy models
and their impact on model performance and results, and by doing
so, answers two questions. First, how accurate are different meth-
ods to reduce time resolution when compared on the same model
and with different model conﬁgurations? Second, how can time
resolution be reduced in the most efﬁcient way while maintaining
scientiﬁc accuracy? The rationale when reducing the number of
time steps is to balance improved computational performance with
model accuracy. This study compares different approaches to
achieve this, including downsampling, statistical clustering meth-
ods, and heuristic selection of speciﬁc days and weeks. Wind and
solar generation show signiﬁcant inter-annual variability, so
multi-decade time series data should ideally be used to represent
the full range of this variability [11,10]. This further complicates
the answers to the two questions posed above: when considering
power systems with very high shares of variable renewable gener-
ation, it is necessary to also consider whether the differences in
accuracy between different time resolution reduction approaches
persist across different years or when examining multi-decade
time series. The analysis is performed with a model of the UK
power system based on the open-source Calliope high-resolution
modeling framework [8].

2. Background

Table 1 gives a stylized overview of the ways in which temporal
resolution has been included in energy models in order of increas-
ing detail (spatial resolution is included for completeness, but this
paper focuses on temporal resolution). With the displacement of
traditional power generation by variable renewables expected to
increase, energy modelers have been moving downwards in this
table from lower to higher resolutions. Approaches such as average
availabilities for technologies, which were sufﬁcient when model-
ing baseload or completely dispatchable generators such as coal or
nuclear power, have been replaced with more explicit treatment of
time. However, this more explicit treatment comes at a computa-
tional cost. Assuming a model with a single year of 8760 hourly
time steps, 20 technologies (such as wind generation or electric

heating), 20 locations and 5 time-dependent constraints (such as
maximum power generation per location, storage charging, and
discharging), more than 17 million total constraints would result.
Reducing such a model’s size by one or two orders of magnitude
by reducing the number of time steps brings with it a concomitant
reduction in computational complexity, and thus in required CPU
time and memory requirements to solve it.

There are broadly two ways to explicitly include temporal detail
in energy models without including full time series data. The ﬁrst
is time slices, that is, a reduced set of time steps chosen to charac-
terize key aspects of temporal variability, for example by covering
weekdays and weekends, different times of day, and different sea-
sons. For example, four seasons with four times per day for both
weekdays and weekends would result in 32 time slices. Large
energy system models such as TIMES generally use time slices
e.g., [19,20]. The second way is representative of typical days (or
longer time periods) extracted or artiﬁcially constructed from full
time series. Typical days are an intermediate step on the path
towards full time series: selecting a number of speciﬁc days from
the data covering as much variability as possible, or constructing
synthetic days by clustering the data. In both cases the goal is to
preserve the relevant statistical properties of the time series and
thus minimize impact on model results.

Two problems arise when reducing the resolution of model
input time series: concurrency and continuity. It is important that
correlation between events is realistic in an energy model, for
example, a stormy winter day may induce higher heating demand,
reduce PV power output to almost zero, but provide above-average
wind power production. A concurrency problem arises when a sub-
set of typical heat demand days are mixed with a subset of typical
wind production days and such correlations are lost. This can be
circumvented by ensuring that an internally consistent set of input
data is used across the entire model. The second problem is that of
continuity and appears when there is a state in a model that needs
to carry over from one time step to the next. The prime example of
this is the state of charge of storage facilities. Ensuring continuity
between time steps can be difﬁcult to address when picking repre-
sentative days, so recent approaches have often used groups of
consecutive days [14]. Selecting days should take into considera-
tion a statistical measure of representativeness, as a selection
based on a typical (e.g. seasonal basis) has shown to be inferior
for high shares of variable renewables [21].

Statistical clustering is a way to group samples into groups
called clusters, such that the similarity of samples within a cluster
is higher than between clusters. It can be used to select represen-
tative time periods, and has been applied in particular when study-
ing demand proﬁles and to estimate load proﬁles where data is
limited. Rhodes et al. [22] use the k-means clustering technique
to group homes with similar hourly electricity demand proﬁles
and use regression to determine which variables inﬂuence demand
in a cluster. Similar clustering approaches for electricity demand
were also used in Räsänen et al. [23] and McLoughlin et al. [24].
Green et al. [12] use k-means clustering for power demand in a
mixed-integer Great Britain (GB) power system dispatch model
written in GAMS, for one year at a time over the 12 years in the
period 1994–2005, reporting no more than around 1% model error
in system-wide power costs but a model speedup of a factor of
about 60 when using their clustered demand data. Clustering has
also been used for more than just demand data. Heuberger et al.
[15] use the k-means clustering approach reported in Green et al.
[12] for demand and for wind and solar production in a cost-
optimizing mixed-integer GB power system planning model,
reporting about a 0.6% error in system-wide cost results and a 4%
error in technology-speciﬁc costs when comparing to unclustered
data. Baringo and Conejo [25] compare the use of load duration
curves and k-means clustering for an efﬁcient representation of

