Article
Challenges and Mitigation Measures in Power Systems with
High Share of Renewables—The Australian Experience

Felipe Arraño-Vargas *

, Zhiwei Shen , Shan Jiang

, John Fletcher

and Georgios Konstantinou

School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, UNSW Sydney, Kensington,
NSW 2052, Australia; zhiwei.shen@unsw.edu.au (Z.S.); shan.jiang4@unsw.edu.au (S.J.);
john.ﬂetcher@unsw.edu.au (J.F.); g.konstantinou@unsw.edu.au (G.K.)
* Correspondence: f.arranovargas@unsw.edu.au

Abstract: Australia is one of the leading countries in energy transition, and its largest power system
is intended to securely operate with up to 75% of variable renewable generation by 2025. High-inertia
synchronous condensers, battery energy storage systems, and grid-forming converters are some of
the technologies supporting this transformation while facilitating the secure operation of the grid.
Synchronous condensers have enabled 2500 MW of solar and wind generation in the state of South
Australia, reaching minimum operational demands of ≈100 MW. Grid-scale battery energy storage
systems have demonstrated not only market beneﬁts by cutting costs to consumers but also essential
grid services during contingencies. Fast frequency response, synthetic inertia, and high fault currents
are some of the grid-supporting capabilities provided by new developments that strengthen the
grid while facilitating the integration of new renewable energy hubs. This manuscript provides a
comprehensive overview, based on the Australian experience, of how power systems are overcoming
expected challenges while continuing to integrate secure, low cost, and clean energy.

Keywords: inverter-based resource (IBR); low-inertia system; weak grid; system strength; synchronous
condenser (SynCon); battery energy storage system (BESS); grid-forming converter; Australian
National Electricity Market (NEM)

1. Introduction

Investment in large-scale renewable generation has accounted more than 60% of
new global power generation in the last couple of years [1]. Multiple policy objectives,
such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions and cost reduction trends, are expected to
drive large-scale renewable generation investments to continue to grow faster than other
energy generation technologies [2]. However, renewable energy zones (REZs), large-scale
geographic areas with high-quality renewable energy resources, are generally situated
in remote areas. These locations usually lack nearby synchronous generation and strong
transmission connections, which, when combined, result in areas with low fault current
and low system strength levels. As a result, the integration of REZ generation projects is
limited by existing/planned grid infrastructure, in addition, to new operational challenges.
Since many of REZ projects connect via power electronics converters, their continuous
connection further weakens the area. This results in a series of additional challenges if
no appropriate measures are taken. Traditional stability (rotor angle, frequency, and volt-
age), resonance and converter-driven stability, power system protection and coordination,
and black-start are some of the technical challenges faced by modern power systems [3,4].
Reinforcing and upgrading the grid is an alternative to overcome with these issues
while strengthening the area. However, planning, approving, and building a transmission
project to support the integration of new REZs may take several more years when com-
pared with the development of a solar or wind power plant [5]. As a result, and without
considering joint network planning, other alternatives are needed to host and support

Citation: Arraño-Vargas, F.; Shen, Z.;

Jiang, S.; Fletcher, J.; Konstantinou, G.

Challenges and Mitigation Measures

in Power Systems with High Share of

Renewables—The Australian

Experience. Energies 2022, 15, 429.

https://doi.org/10.3390/en15020429

Academic Editor: Javier Contreras

Received: 13 December 2021

Accepted: 5 January 2022

Published: 7 January 2022

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Energies 2022, 15, 429. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15020429

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)energiesEnergies 2022, 15, 429

2 of 22

these projects and the network to which they connect. Some grid upgrades include ﬂexible
ac transmission systems (FACTS), synchronous condensers (SynCons) [6], battery energy
storage systems (BESSs) [7], or a combination of them [8].

The Australian National Electricity Market (NEM) is one of the world’s leading power
systems for both large-scale and distributed IBR integration [9,10]. As of November 2021,
the NEM presents more than 15 GW of installed capacity between large-scale solar PV
and wind, representing near 25% of the total generation capacity [11]. Furthermore, the
NEM has more than 10 GW of distributed solar (as at May 2020) [12]. The amount of
instantaneous generation from these variable energy resources that can operate on the NEM
at any time depends on system conditions (e.g., network congestion, system curtailment,
and self-curtails) [13]. In particular, system curtailment limits renewables to preserve the
security of NEM by managing frequency and maintaining system strength. Some of the
actions that can result in managing power system requirements include the utilization of a
range of ﬂexible devices such as high-inertia SynCons and BESSs. Targeted actions together
with suitable investments in infrastructure can allow the NEM to operate securely with up
to 75% of variable renewable generation by 2025 and near 90% by 2035 [14].

Motivated by the above discussion, this work aims to summarize existing and most
common challenges and mitigation measures in modern power systems with a high share
of renewable energy. A comprehensive overview, based on the Australian experience,
is provided to illustrate how power systems can overcome expected challenges while
continuing to integrate secure, low-cost, and clean energy.

The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a summary
of challenges in actual power systems and their mitigation measures. Issues observed in
Australia are also included in the Section. Trending technologies and how Australia is
facilitating the integration of IBRs are presented in Section 3, while their impact in the
system is discussed in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

2. Challenges in Power Systems with High Share of Renewable Generation

The decrease in short-circuit ratio (SCR) and system strength may result in several
undesired operations of inverter-based resources (IBRs) and/or adverse power system
conditions that require new mitigation measures. This Section ﬁrst provides a deﬁnition
of SCR and system strength. Later, challenges and solutions in power systems with large
participation of renewable energy are described to ﬁnally provide some of the challenges
faced in Australia.

2.1. Deﬁnition of Short-Circuit Ratio and System Strength

SCR is a metric that describes the voltage stiffness of the grid. It is used to characterize
grid strength and screen for system stability risks close to (new) power electronics convert-
ers such as in IBRs and non-synchronous generation power plants [15]. Conventionally,
SCR is deﬁned as the ratio of the short-circuit MVA capacity (SCCMVA) at the bus to which
the new generation source will connect to the MW rating of the new source (PMW).

SCCMVA
PMW
Even though SCR limits are not prescriptive and they need to be evaluated on a

SCR =

(1)

.

case-by-case basis, a SCR < 5 is considered low, and the system is considered weak [16].

In order to better estimate system strength in weak systems with multi-infeed and
high penetration of IBRs, other system strength index methods have been proposed. GE’s
composite short-circuit ratio (CSCR) and ERCOT’s weighted short-circuit ratio (WSCR)
take into account the effects of all electrically close converters. For GE’s CSCR, the total
rating of all local and close converters is included [17]. Additionally, the calculation of
SCC considers a three-phase fault under low load conditions and no contribution from
converters. ERCOT’s WSCR, on the other hand, assumes that all converters are connected

