Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Results in Engineering 

journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/results-in-engineering 

Early prediction of battery degradation in grid-scale battery energy storage 
system using extreme gradient boosting algorithm 

Chico Hermanu Brillianto Apribowo a,b, Sasongko Pramono Hadi a, Franscisco Danang Wijaya a, 
Mokhammad Isnaeni Bambang Setyonegoro a, Sarjiya a, c,* 
a Department of Electrical and Information Engineering, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, 55281, Indonesia 
b Department of Electrical Engineering, Universitas Sebelas Maret, Surakarta, 57126, Indonesia 
c Center for Energy Studies, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, 55281, Indonesia   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Battery energy storage system 
Battery degradation 
Remaining useful life 
Extreme gradient boosting algorithm 
Hyperparameter tuning 

The growth of battery energy storage systems (BESS) is caused by the variability and intermittent nature of high 
demand  and  renewable  power  generation  at  the  network  scale.  In  the  context  of  BESS,  Lithium-ion  (Li-ion) 
battery occupies a crucial position, although it is faced with challenges related to performance battery degra-
dation over time due to electrochemical processes. This battery degradation is a crucial factor to account for, 
based on its potential to diminish the efficiency and safety of electrical system equipment, thereby contributing 
to increased system planning costs. This implies that the health of battery needs to be diagnosed, particularly by 
determining  remaining  useful  life  (RUL),  to  avoid  unexpected  operational  costs  and  ensure  system  safety. 
Therefore, this study aimed to use machine learning models, specifically extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) 
algorithm,  to  estimate  RUL,  with  a  focus  on  the  temperature  variable,  an  aspect  that  had  been  previously 
underemphasized. Utilizing XGBoost model, along with fine-tuning its hyperparameters, proved to be a more 
accurate and efficient method for predicting RUL. The evaluation of the model yielded promising outcomes, with 
a root mean square error (RMSE) of 90.1 and a mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of 7.5 %. Additionally, 
the results showed that the model could improve RUL predictions for batteries within BESS. This study signif-
icantly contributed to optimizing planning and operations for BESS, as well as developing more efficient and 
effective maintenance strategies.   

1. Introduction 

Approximately 80 % of the world’s energy supply is derived from 
fossil fuels, including coal, oil, and natural gas. The combustion of these 
fuels  is  a  significant  contributor  to  greenhouse  gas  emissions  (GHG), 
especially carbon dioxide (CO2), a significant driver of climate change 
[1]. In response, there has been a collaborative global effort to increase 
the utilization of renewable energy sources (RES) as a critical strategy to 
support  Net  Zero  Emission  (NZE)  initiatives  [2].  This  shift  towards 
renewable energy not only aims to address the pressing environmental 
concerns but also aligns with the broader international commitments, 
such as the 2015 Paris Agreement and the United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG), which underline the need for sustainable and 
environmentally friendly energy solutions [3]. 

Electricity  is  very  important in  achieveing  the  world’s  sustainable 
development goals. The reliable, sustainable, and clean production of 

energy has a positive impact on the global economy and development 
and also benefits the environment. In the industrialized era, the increase 
in fossil fuel combustion and its decreasing availability have compelled 
the industry to turn towards renewable energy (RE), including photo-
voltaic (PV) and wind power [4]. However, there are continuous chal-
lenges in electrical grids relying on renewable energy (RE) and ensuring 
the reliability of energy supply. The variations and uncertainties in RE 
sources, especially during peak generation periods, can lead to changes 
in power flow directions, causing voltage spikes in the grid [5]. Differ-
ences  between  energy  demand  and  thermal  generator  output  further 
increase the peak-to-average demand ratio, significantly affecting total 
energy  costs  [6,7].  In  this  scenario,  adopting  battery  energy  storage 
systems (BESS) technology serves as a practical solution to solve these 
challenges. 

To increase the integration of RE, BESS proves to be an ideal tech-
nology, aiding power system in managing fluctuations and interruptions 

* Corresponding author. Department of Electrical and Information Engineering, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, 55281, Indonesia. 

E-mail address: sarjiya@ugm.ac.id (Sarjiya).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rineng.2023.101709 
Received 14 November 2023; Received in revised form 16 December 2023; Accepted 21 December 2023   

ResultsinEngineering21(2024)101709Availableonline23December20232590-1230/©2024TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).C.H. Brillianto Apribowo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                               

in grid-scale and high-demand generation [8,9]. BESS is typically con-
nected to the network through converter power electronics, facilitating 
rapid and flexible control. Furthermore, it finds application in various 
network  functions,  including  voltage  and  frequency  support,  load 
shifting, transmission and distribution interruption, and peak shaving 
[10,11].  Large-scale  BESS  can  store  energy  from  renewable  sources, 
transforming the power grid into an adaptable and flexible system [12, 
13]. At the grid level, BESS efficiently manages energy by meeting both 
high  and  low-demand  storage  needs.  Moreover,  battery,  being  faster 
than many other energy storage devices, can be strategically installed in 
diverse locations for various purposes [14]. 

The  phenomenon  of  electromigration  (EM),  comprising  material 
migration induced by an electric field, has been investigated for a cen-
tury, initially discovered by French scientist M. Gerardin [15]. EM has 
been recognized as a major contributor to the failure of integrated cir-
cuits  (ICs)  interconnects  since  the  advent  of  packaged  ICs  in  the  late 
1960s.  This  phenomenon  significantly  impacts  the  reliability  of  elec-
tronic  system,  particularly  in  modern  power  electronics  applications 
such  as  computer-controlled  machinery,  telecommunications,  and 
mechatronics  [16].  Advances 
in  nanomaterials,  exemplified  by 
environmentally-friendly  synthesis  methods  such  as  Nd2Sn2O7  nano-
structures  and  the  development  of  high-efficiency  photocatalysts 
namely CoFe2O4@SiO2@Dy2Ce2O7 nanocomposites, have made sub-
stantial progress in improving environmental sustainability and energy 
storage efficiency [17,18]. The synthesis of nanocrystalline neodymium 
zirconate  and  heterojunctions  of  WO3–SrTiO3  further  shows  the  sig-
nificance  of  advanced  materials  for  environmental  management  and 
efficient energy applications [19,20]. Additionally, the enhanced stor-
age  capacity  of  lanthanum  zirconium  oxide  ceramics  signifies  in-
novations in energy storage technologies [21]. In the context of BESS, 
EM  phenomenon  can  have  profound  implications.  Various  factors, 
including  variations  in  current  densities,  temperature  distributions, 
material  changes,  manufacturing  tolerances,  and  existing  damages, 
must be considered to ensure the efficient and cost-effective design of 
this technology. These studies collectively describe the critical role of 
material  science  in  advancing  the  efficiency,  reliability,  and  sustain-
ability of modern power electronics and BESS. 

BESS configurations can contain lithium-ion (Li-Ion) battery or other 
battery  technology  panels,  depending  on  network  and  microgrid 
voltage, current, and energy requirements [22]. Although lithium bat-
tery is widely used in BESS applications in numerous industrial system 
and network, unexpected failures can lead to catastrophic occurrence, 
such as performance degradation, operational problems, and disasters. 
Therefore, accurately and swiftly predicting the health of lithium bat-
tery is crucial [23]. According to Cardoso et al. battery age also impacts 
the cost of power system planning. The study suggested that considering 
battery  degradation  limits  could  reduce  the  annual  total  savings  for 
photovoltaic and storage system from 5 to 12 % [24]. 

When examining the degradation in BESS using lithium-ion battery, 
a crucial mechanism to consider is the development of the solid elec-
trolyte interface (SEI) layer. This layer is obtained from side reactions 
between  the  electrolyte  and  anode,  creating  an  exceedingly  thin 
passivation  layer  on  the  graphite  anode  particles,  typically  a  few 
nanometers thick. In addition, the SEI layer, formed during the initial 
usage cycle, contributes to permanent capacity loss [25,26]. It is crucial 
to  be aware that the  phenomenon of  lithium plating (LP) also affects 
battery  performance,  primarily  triggered  by  factors  including  1)  the 
chemical composition of the electrolyte, 2) the capacity ratio between 
the anode and cathode, as well as 3) operational conditions namely low 
temperatures and high charging rates. Another crucial fact to be aware 
of is that the unmodified graphite electrodes at the anode are especially 
susceptible to LP, and it is irreversible [27]. Previously, LP can evolve 
into dendritic structures that might damage the cell separator, resulting 
in  a  series  of  internal  short  circuits.  This  scenario  leads  to  localized 
heating in the cell and can potentially cause thermal runaway, battery 
failure, and fire outbreak. 

Fig. 1 shows the relationship between battery degradation models 
and  optimal  energy  system  planning.  Typically,  battery  degradation 
models serve as constraints in optimization planning, and also influence 
the balance of grid power distribution. Simultaneously, the penetration 
of renewable energy system (RES) and the annual increase in load, in 
accordance with national RE regulations, are considered in the system 
inputs.  This  planning  affects  the  life  cycle  of  BESS,  which  may  need 
replacement after optimization in a specific year. 

Based  on  the  above  discussion,  battery  degradation  needs  to  be 
considered,  with  factors  including  state  of  charge  (SOC),  depth  of 
discharge  (DOD),  life  cycle,  and  temperature.  In  addition,  the  degra-
dation impacts the total cost of planning, capacity (electricity and en-
ergy),  and  the  optimal  location  of  BESS.  Investigation  of  battery 
degradation  models  is  expected  to  enhance  the  flexibility  of  conven-
tional  and  RES  generators,  increase  system  load  factors,  and  reduce 
system planning costs due to intermittency. 

Several  elements  in  the  usage  process,  including  chemicals  and 
environmental  conditions,  contribute  to  battery  degradation.  When 
battery  fails  to  meet  specific  energy  and  capacity  requirements,  it  is 
considered  to  have  reached  the  end  of  life  (EOL).  Therefore,  battery 
degradation should be considered for safety reasons, in order to prevent 
explosions [28]. Damage to battery system also results in performance 
degradation or damage to battery system equipment, thereby leading to 
higher repair costs. It is also important to be aware that battery degra-
dation  significantly  impacts  system  costs,  state  of  health  (SOH),  and 
remaining  useful  life  (RUL),  thereby  serving  as  critical  measures  of 
battery health and performance. SOH reveals aging rates, total reduced 
capacity, and increased resistance, while RUL shows the current time 
and EOL [23]. The main factors contributing to BESS capacity degra-
dation  include  nonlinear  voltage,  current, temperature,  fast  charging, 
slow discharge, and extended battery life [29]. Due to battery inherent 
nonlinearity,  estimating  RUL  of  BESS  system  is  challenging.  The  ma-
chine  learning  RUL  estimation  method  proves  more  flexible  and 
nonlinear compared to a method based on a failure physical model. 

Early  prediction  of  SOH  and  RUL  is  critical  areas  of  exploration 
aimed at improving battery reliability and lifespan. The impact of bat-
tery degradation is primarily evident in changes in battery capacity and 
efficiency. In general, the capacity, energy, and power of both SOH and 
RUL are influenced by battery age [30]. In addition, the degradation of 
lithium  battery  performance  is  dependent  on  charging  behavior, 
discharge, and temperature fluctuations [31]. SOH diagnostics show a 
decline  in  performance,  prompting  preventive  measures  to  avoid  po-
tential accidents [32]. Accurate SOH estimation is crucial for predicting 
RUL  as  a  capacity  indicator.  Previous  literature  [30]  showed  the  ne-
cessity for precise and accurate predictions of SOH and RUL to overcome 
limitations imposed by battery degradation, improve performance, and 
optimize battery operation. 

Fig. 2 shows the relationship between battery degradation modeling, 
RUL, and SOH. According to a previous study [30], battery degradation 
process model was developed in the combined framework of SOH and 
RUL.  The  framework  addresses  factors  contributing  to  battery  degra-
dation and failure in SOH assessment model. Diagnosing and estimating 
SOH aids in modeling RUL battery by determining the time or cycles 
required to reach 80 %. To model battery degradation accurately, pre-
cise calculations of SOH and RUL are essential. 

Methods for early prediction and estimation are broadly categorized 
into three groups, namely direct measurement, modeling, and data as 
shown  in  Fig.  3.  Direct  measurement  method,  such  as  open  circuit 
voltage  to  calculate  capacity  and  electronic  circuit  impedance  spec-
troscopy  to  measure  impedance,  are  used  for  direct  measurement  of 
battery capacity or impedance [34]. Model-based SOH estimation use 
electrochemical  processes  or  similar  electrical  circuits  to  simulate 
mathematical  or  stochastic  models  representing  battery  degradation 
events. These models estimate battery capacity or resistance by deter-
mining  model  parameters.  Various  algorithms,  including  Kalman 
filtering, double sliding mode observers, and particle filtering (PF) [35, 

ResultsinEngineering21(2024)1017092