Gondwana Research 127 (2024) 131–143

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Gondwana Research

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / g r

Modeling the linkage between climate-tech, energy transition, and CO2
emissions: Do environmental regulations matter?
Mahmood Ahmad a,b, Zahoor Ahmed c,d, Muhammad Riaz e, Xiyue Yang f,⇑

a Business School, Shandong University of Technology, Zibo-255000, Shandong, China
b Wenzhounese Economy Research Institute, Wenzhou University, Wenzhou 325000, China
c Department of Accounting and Finance, Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, Cyprus International University, Mersin 10, Haspolat 99040, Turkey
d Department of Business Administration, Faculty of Management Sciences, ILMA University, Karachi, Pakistan
e School of International Trade and Economics, University of International Business and Economics, Beijing 100029, China
f Key Laboratory of Ocean Energy Utilization and Energy Conservation of Ministry of Education, School of Energy and Power, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 4 November 2022
Revised 6 February 2023
Accepted 6 April 2023
Available online 10 April 2023

Keywords:
Climate-Tech
Energy Transition
Environmental Regulations
CO2 Emissions

The transition from conventional energy to clean energy is the ultimate strategy to reduce global CO2
emissions. In this regard, climate technologies (climate-tech) can pave the way toward achieving the
capabilities required to promote alternative energy and energy saving. In addition, environmental regu-
lations can support technological upgrading, energy transition, and emissions reduction to promote sus-
tainable development. With this in view, this study investigates the impact of climate technologies
(climate-tech) and energy transitions on CO2 emissions in the European Union (EU) member countries.
Further, we examine the role of environmental regulation in the relationship between climate-tech,
energy transition, and CO2 emissions. The empirical analysis is conducted based on international panel
data for 26 EU countries ranging from 1994 to 2019, and the Common Correlated Effects Mean Group
(CCE-MG) method is employed to estimate the coefﬁcients of the variables. The outcomes of the analysis
indicate that both climate-tech and energy transitions mitigate environmental degradation by reducing
carbon emissions. Additionally, environmental regulations are found to be an effective monitoring and
controlling tool that can signiﬁcantly reduce CO2 emissions. Moreover, economic growth and urbaniza-
tion as control variables contribute to increasing CO2 emissions, thus negatively affecting environmental
sustainability. The causal analysis demonstrates that decision-making trends related to climate-tech,
energy transition, and environmental regulations inﬂuence CO2 emissions. Conversely, strategies for cop-
ing with CO2 emissions and climate change will affect energy transitions and environmental regulations.
In light of these analytical ﬁndings, this paper proposes that EU countries should vigorously develop
climate-related green technologies and actively promote the energy transition process along with the
implementation of environmental regulations for sustainable development.
(cid:1) 2023 International Association for Gondwana Research. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Climate change is one of the crucial issues hindering the sus-
tainable development of human society and is being widely dis-
cussed by all sectors of society (Akimoto et al., 2021; Khan et al.,
2022a). The rapidly expanding economic landscape and increasing
industrialization have accelerated the widespread use of fossil fuel
energy sources and led to signiﬁcant emissions of air pollutants
(Jiang et al., 2022; Verbicˇ et al., 2022). To combat the phenomena,

⇑ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: mahmood@sdut.edu.cn (M. Ahmad), zahoorahmed83@yahoo.
com (Z. Ahmed), riazswl@hotmail.com (M. Riaz), yangxiyue513@mail.dlut.edu.cn
(X. Yang).

the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) emphasize the need to
take action on climate change on an urgent basis.

Many studies indicate that climate and environmental tech-
nologies are effective and environmentally friendly means of mit-
igating climate issues (Ding et al., 2021; Obobisa et al., 2022).
Climate technologies (climate-tech), also described as green tech-
nologies, refer to technological innovation that improves environ-
mental quality, reduces emissions, enhances energy efﬁciency, as
well as promotes green development (Ahmad and Wu, 2022). The-
oretically, effective climate-related technologies can reduce equip-
ment losses, excessive costs, and fuel waste in the production
process and improve production efﬁciency. In addition, it can pro-
mote the well-being of humans (or society) (Can et al., 2022, 2021).
Climate-tech mitigates atmospheric pollution by decreasing

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gr.2023.04.003
1342-937X/(cid:1) 2023 International Association for Gondwana Research. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

M. Ahmad, Z. Ahmed, M. Riaz et al.

Gondwana Research 127 (2024) 131–143

emissions generated from production and promotes sustainability
of production patterns and consumption (Xin et al., 2021; Xu et al.,
2022). However, in practice, climate technology development is a
highly costly and complex process that requires substantial human
and ﬁnancial resources. In the short term, inadequate climate tech-
nologies may consume more resources and may even require addi-
tional funding to reduce the costs and challenges of climate
technology development. Therefore,
innovations
measured by patents may be deemed a barrier to dealing with cli-
mate problems, thus limiting development (Raiser et al., 2017).
However, in the long term, complete and advanced climate tech-
nologies will lower the portion of fossil energy and escalate the
process of the green energy transition, which in turn can improve
environmental quality (Danish and Ulucak, 2021).

technological

The energy transition refers to the process of shifting from the
use of non-renewable energy sources, such as fossil fuels, to the
use of renewable energy sources, such as wind, solar, and hydro-
power. This process helps to promote sustainable development
and address environmental challenges (Saidi and Omri, 2020).
The energy transition is a global energy policy implemented by
all countries after realizing the threat of CO2 emissions (Can and
Ahmed, 2023; Khan et al., 2022b). Since 1990, the EU has been cut-
ting the share of coal in the primary energy structure and replacing
fossil fuels with the widespread utilization of low-carbon fuels
(such as natural gas and atomic) and renewable sources. In July
2021, the EU proposed the ‘‘Fit for 55” package (‘‘commitment to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55 % by the end of
2030 compared to 1990”), of which the bill to add a portion of
renewable energy is the crucial component. However, the current
global energy prices are volatile, and energy supply problems are
In order to urgently decrease the dependence on
plentiful.
imported energy,
the European Commission published the
‘‘REPower EU” energy plan on its website in May this year, which
intends to broaden portions of renewable energy in energy struc-
ture from 40 % to 45 % by 2030 (EU, 2022). There are many chal-
lenges in the usage of renewable energy. For instance, renewable
energy technologies require large initial investments and have long
R&D cycles, which imply very high costs (Marques and Fuinhas,
2012; Ocal and Aslan, 2013). However, expanding the quota of
green energy and accelerating the energy transition process are
undoubtedly important means to attain environmental sustain-
ability. Many studies have shown that renewable energy plays a
crucial part in lowering CO2 emissions (Balsalobre-Lorente et al.,
2018; Dogan and Seker, 2016; Ocal and Aslan, 2013).

In addition, environmental regulations as an essential environ-
mental preservation strategy have been a hot issue for research.
The government has strengthened environmental pollution control
by imposing environment-related taxes and increasing the cost of
pollution emissions. However, overly strict environmental regula-
tions may have different environmental effects, and there are dif-
ferent views of scholars in this context. Some research ﬁndings
support the ‘‘green paradox” that strict environmental regulations
are not effective in reducing emissions, but rather energy produc-
ers will accelerate energy extraction to avoid more losses, leading
to the opposite outcome of environmental policies (Hao et al.,
2018; Wang and Zhang, 2022; Can et al., 2021). However, another
part of the research argues that energy reserves are ﬁnite and can-
not be sustained indeﬁnitely and that excessive extraction costs
will reduce emissions when environmental regulations intervene
(Hashmi and Alam, 2019; Kathuria, 2007; Yirong, 2022). Some aca-
demics also suggest regional heterogeneity in the effect of environ-
mental regulations on emissions, which may also vary depending
on the strength of environmental regulations (Kathuria, 2007;
Wenbo and Yan, 2018).

This study concentrates on the countries within the European
Union (EU) due to following reasons. The European Union (EU)

recently accounted for 8 % of the total CO2 emissions in the world.
However, the cumulative emissions of the EU since the start of
industrialization are among the highest globally. Consequently,
the EU makes a substantial contribution to the accumulation of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere (Lau et al., 2012). But in tan-
dem, the EU is also a staunch defender and implementer of the Paris
Agreement and is one of the ﬁrst regions which offers a carbon–neu-
tral plan. According to the EU’s climate policy, the EU will cut down
its emissions by 55 % by 2030 compared with 1990, and realize
carbon neutrality, i.e. net zero emissions, by 2050. Therefore, an
in-depth analysis of the factors inﬂuencing CO2 emissions in EU
countries is crucial to accelerate the EU’s goal of carbon neutrality.
However, available studies lack a joint analysis of the impacts of
climate-tech, energy transition, and environmental regulations on
CO2 emissions under the context of the EU. Therefore, the objective
of this study is to analyze the effect of climate-tech, energy trans-
formation, and environmental regulations on CO2 emissions by
including economic growth and urbanization in the nexus and pro-
pose policy insights that would be useful for the reduction of car-
bon emissions. This study answers the following questions: (i) Are
climate technologies signiﬁcantly effective in mitigating emis-
sions? (ii) Does accelerating the energy transformation process
help mitigate environmental degradation? (iii) What is the impact
of environmental regulations on climate change? In light of this,
this paper investigates the above issues using annual panel data
for 26 EU countries from 1994 to 2019 and contributes to the exist-
ing literature in the following ways: (1) In terms of research frame-
work design, this study includes climate technology, energy
transition, environmental regulation, and carbon emissions in the
same framework for the ﬁrst time, which helps to study the emis-
sion reduction effects of climate technology and energy transition
while considering the role of environmental regulation in the emis-
sion reduction process. (2) At the level of empirical analysis, this
study uses the CCE-MG method to examine the relationship
between the variables of interest and the CuP-FM and CuP-BC
methods to test the robustness of the results. This helps to address
possible endogeneity and cross-sectional dependence in the
empirical analysis process. (3) This study enriches the ﬁndings in
the EU context and conﬁrms that climate technologies play an
important role in CO2 emission reduction in the EU. At the same
time, the advancement of energy transition can reduce CO2 emis-
sions faster. More importantly, in the EU context, environmental
regulations do not have a ‘‘green paradox” effect but have a crucial
deterrent effect on CO2 emissions. In addition, economic develop-
ment and urbanization are considered to be important drivers of
emissions. (4) Finally, the Dumitrescu and Hurlin causality test
considering cross-sectional dependence conﬁrms that climate
technology, energy transition, and environmental regulation all
help to explain future changes in carbon emissions in 26 EU
countries.

The structure of the paper is as follows: In Section 2, a literature
review is presented. Section 3 details the research data and
methodology used. The empirical results are discussed in Section 4.
Finally, in Section 5, the paper concludes with policy recommenda-
tions, limitations, and suggestions for future research.

2. Literature review

2.1. Climate-tech and environmental quality

Technology innovation is widely viewed as the most effective
way for countries around the world to accomplish Sustainable
Development Goals as they face the Fourth Industrial Revolution
(Ahmad et al., 2022). In this background, studies have indicated
that technological innovation could be an essential instrument

132

