i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 4 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 7 6 3 e5 7 7 5

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / h e

Role of power-to-gas in an integrated gas
and electricity system in Great Britain

Meysam Qadrdan
Jianzhong Wu, Nick Jenkins

*
, Muditha Abeysekera, Modassar Chaudry,

Cardiff School of Engineering, Cardiff University, Queens Buildings, The Parade, Cardiff CF24 3AA, UK

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:

Received 29 December 2014

Received in revised form

1 March 2015

Accepted 2 March 2015

Power-to-gas (PtG) converts electricity into hydrogen using the electrolysis process and

uses the gas grid for the storage and transport of hydrogen. Hydrogen is injected into a gas

network in a quantity and quality compatible with the gas safety regulations and thereby

transported as a mixture of hydrogen and natural gas to demand centres. Once integrated

into the electricity network, PtG systems can provide ﬂexibility to the power system and

Available online 31 March 2015

absorb excess electricity from renewables to produce hydrogen. Injection of hydrogen into

Keywords:

Power-to-gas

the gas network reduces gas volumes supplied from terminals.

In order to investigate this concept, hydrogen electrolysers were included as a tech-

nology option within an operational optimisation model of the Great Britain (GB) combined

Hydrogen electrolysis

gas and electricity network (CGEN). The model was used to determine the minimum cost of

Combined gas and electricity

meeting the electricity and gas demand in a typical low and high electricity demand day in

networks

GB, in the presence of a signiﬁcant capacity of wind generation. The value of employing

power-to-gas systems in the gas and electricity supply system was investigated given

different allowable levels of hydrogen injections. The results showed that producing

hydrogen from electricity is capable of reducing wind curtailment in a high wind case and

decreasing the overall cost of operating the GB gas and electricity network. The northern

part of GB was identiﬁed as a suitable region to develop hydrogen electrolysis and injection

facilities due to its vicinity to a signiﬁcant capacity of wind generation, as well as the ex-

istence of gas network headroom capacity, which is expected to increase as a result of

depletion of UK domestic gas resources.
Copyright © 2015, Hydrogen Energy Publications, LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

Introduction

The UK government has ambitious plans to deploy renewable
sources of energy and reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
from the energy sector. As part of the EU 2020 target [1], the
share of electrical energy generated from renewables needs to

increase to approximately 30% by 2020. Furthermore, the UK is
committed to reduce its GHG emissions by at least 80% (from
1990 levels) by 2050 [2].

Wind generation is projected to play an important role in
achieving the UK's renewable and emissions targets. The
onshore installed wind capacity is expected to increase to

* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ44 02920870370.

E-mail address: qadrdanm@cardiff.ac.uk (M. Qadrdan).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.03.004
0360-3199/Copyright © 2015, Hydrogen Energy Publications, LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

5764

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 4 0 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 7 6 3 e5 7 7 5

21 GW by 2035 from 5.5 GW in 2012 [3]. Offshore wind ca-
pacity is expected to increase to 12 GW by 2020, 28.6 GW by
2025 and up to 37.5 GW by 2035 [3]. As the penetration of
renewable power increases, periods of excess generation
will become more frequent and of larger magnitude. Previ-
ous studies [4,5] suggest electricity curtailment could reach
2.8 TWh per annum by 2020 and as much as 50e100 TWh
per annum by 2050 depending on the amount of installed
renewables. If storage is used the monetary value of storing
this excess energy could be as high as £10 bn/year by 2050
[4].

The integration of large capacity of wind generation into
the grid poses a number of challenges. Given that large wind
farms (especially offshore wind farms) are located far away
from demand centres, signiﬁcant investment is required to
build or reinforce the electricity transmission network to
transport the power generated. The variability of wind power,
which results in an annual capacity factor of 27%e35% [6],
makes it difﬁcult to justify the expansion of transmission
capacity to accommodate the maximum wind power pro-
duced. Previous studies [6] showed that the curtailment of
wind power is sensitive to insufﬁcient transmission capacity,
low consumer demand and installed must-run generation
units such as nuclear. Currently, UK wind curtailment is
0.1 TWh/annum [5] and occurs primarily due to transmission
line constraints. In a future scenario where the UK increases
its nuclear power generation capacity alongside wind,
curtailment will increase further.

Owing to a number of ﬁnancial incentives supporting efﬁ-
ciency improvements (Green Deal, Energy Company Obliga-
tion) and a shift to electriﬁed heating [7], the demand for gas to
domestic dwellings is projected to decrease over the next few

Fig. 2 e Power-to-gas system schematic.

decades [3]. The decrease in gas demand combined with the
depletion of the UK domestic gas resources is changing the
pattern of gas ﬂows in the National Transmission System
(NTS), as shown by Fig. 1. In particular, the north-south gas
ﬂow is projected to decrease further despite the large capacity
of the gas transmission network in Scotland.

Power-to-gas (PtG) converts electricity into hydrogen
using the electrolysis process and uses the gas grid for the
storage and transport of hydrogen. This method is different
from conventional electrical energy storage systems, which
absorb and output electrical energy (pumped storage, batte-
ries). PtG systems produce hydrogen that can be blended
with natural gas in a quantity and quality compatible with
the gas grid. Fig. 2 shows a schematic of a PtG system. In a

Fig. 1 e Gas ﬂow pattern in the NTS [8].

