International Journal of Sustainable Development &
World Ecology

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tsdw20

Green innovation, foreign investment and carbon
emissions: a roadmap to sustainable development
via green energy and energy efficiency for BRICS
economies

Queling Zeng, Mehmet Akif Destek, Zeeshan Khan, Ramez Abubakr Badeeb
& Changyong Zhang

To cite this article: Queling Zeng, Mehmet Akif Destek, Zeeshan Khan, Ramez Abubakr Badeeb
& Changyong Zhang (2024) Green innovation, foreign investment and carbon emissions:
a roadmap to sustainable development via green energy and energy efficiency for BRICS
economies, International Journal of Sustainable Development & World Ecology, 31:2, 191-205,
DOI: 10.1080/13504509.2023.2268569

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2023.2268569

Published online: 01 Nov 2023.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 416

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tsdw20

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT & WORLD ECOLOGY 
2024, VOL. 31, NO. 2, 191–205 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2023.2268569

Green innovation, foreign investment and carbon emissions: a roadmap to 
sustainable development via green energy and energy efficiency for BRICS 
economies

Queling Zenga, Mehmet Akif Destekb,c, Zeeshan Khand, Ramez Abubakr Badeebe  and Changyong Zhangf

aSchool of Artificial Intelligence, Guangdong Mechanical & Electrical Polytechnic, Guangzhou, China;  bDepartment of Economics, 
Gaziantep University, Gaziantep, Turkey;  cAdnan Kassar School of Business, Lebanese American University, Beirut, Lebanon;  dFaculty of 
Business, Curtin University, Miri, Sarawak, Malaysia;  eFaculty of Art and Social Sciences, Nottingham University Business School, Jalan 
Broga, Semenyih, Malaysia;  fDepartment of Accounting, Finance and Economics, Faculty of Business, Curtin University, Miri, Sarawak, 
Malaysia

ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 7 August 2023  
Accepted 5 October 2023 

KEYWORDS 
Foreign direct investment; 
green energy; environmental 
Kuznets curve; trade; 
technological innovation; 
carbon emissions

ABSTRACT
In  contemporary  times,  emerging  economies  are  intended  to  achieve  higher  economic 
growth  via  foreign  direct  investment  and  technological  innovation.  However,  due  to 
increased  environmental  challenges,  these  economies  are  adopting  green  energy  as  the 
key  source  of  environmental  recovery  and  net  zero  emissions.  The  present  study 
investigates  the  influence  of  FDI,  technological  innovation,  green  energy,  and  trade 
on  carbon  emissions  in  BRICS  economies  during  1990–2022.  This  study  also  considers 
the  role  of  economic  expansion  in  identifying  the  environmental  Kuznets  curve  (EKC). 
Using  several  panel  diagnostic  and  cointegration  tests,  this  study  validates  the  slope 
heterogeneity  and  the  existence  of  the  cointegration  between  variables.  Due  to  the 
non-normal  data  dispersion,  this  study  uses  novel  moments  quantile  regression,  while 
bootstrap  quantile  regression  is  used  for  the  robustness.  The  results  examined  asserted 
the  presence  of  the  EKC  hypothesis  in  the  region,  where  the  initial  growth  enhances 
emissions  while  after  reaching  at  a  threshold  level,  the  emission  level  tends  to  reduce 
and  environmental  quality  improves.  Besides,  this  study  observed  that  foreign  trade 
and  technological  innovation  are  the  key  drivers  of  environmental  degradation  as  these 
indicators  significantly  enhances  pollution  emissions.  In  contrast,  foreign  investment, 
energy  efficiency,  renewable  electricity  output,  and  renewable’s  consumption  signifi-
cantly  improve  environmental  quality  by  declining  carbon  emissions.  Following  the 
empirical  results,  the  policy  recommendations  asserted  enhanced  investment  in  renew-
able  and  energy  efficiency  sectors  while  attracting  more  foreign  investment  for  sustain-
able  development.

1. Introduction

The  correlation  between  economic  expansion/growth 
(GDP)  and  climatic  change  has  been  extensively  inves-
tigated within sustainability, environmental, and energy 
economics.  Numerous  studies  have  explored  this  rela-
tionship,  including  Bashir  et  al.  (2023);  Gu  et  al.  (2023); 
Ali  et  al.  (2022);  Balsalobre-Lorente  et  al.  (2022);  Leitão 
et  al.  (2021).  There  is  a  significant  interconnection 
between  two  distinct  categories  of  empirical  research: 
the  environmental  Kuznets  curve  (EKC)  and  the  causes 
of economy’s development. The experimental investiga-
tions have provided explanations for these two relation-
ships  by  examining  variables  including  foreign  direct 
investment  (FDI),  foreign  trade,  renewable  energy, and 
emissions of pollutants. Furthermore, these studies have 
been implemented in various nations or regions, using 
various  econometric  methodologies  such  as  panel  or 
time series analysis.

The  BRICS  economies  have  considerable  impor-
tance  due  to  their  substantial  share  of  the  global 
population  and  economic  productivity.  As  these 
countries  undergo  a  period  of  rapid  urbanization 
and  industrialization,  they  are  concurrently  con-
fronted  with  the  challenging  task  of  ensuring  envir-
onmental  sustainability,  with  a  specific  focus  on 
mitigating  carbon  emissions  (CO2e)  (Qing  et  al.  
2023).  Since  the  BRICS  countries  are  in  the  take-off 
situation  in  the  economic  growth’s  perspective. 
Therefore,  industrial  and  economic  activities  have 
been  enhanced,  mostly  dependent  on  fossil  fuel 
consumption, 
to  higher  CO2e.  From 
Figure  1,  it  can  be  observed  that  the  level  of  CO2e 
persistently  rises.  However,  China  remains  the  top- 
emitting  economy  within  the  group  economies,  fol-
lowed  by  India  and  Russia.  Still,  over  the  years,  the 
level  of  emissions  has  increased  in  China  and  India, 
while  Russia  has  reduced  the  level  of  CO2e.

leading 

CONTACT Mehmet Akif Destek 
Gaziantep 1102-2801, Turkey
© 2023 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 

adestek@gantep.edu.tr 

Department of Economics, Gaziantep University, Adnan Kassar School of Business, 

