pubs.acs.org/JACS

Article

Potential-Driven Restructuring of Cu Single Atoms to Nanoparticles
for Boosting the Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrate to Ammonia
Xiaoyan Liu, Xiaofeng Yang,* Shengxin Zhang, Qiao Zhao, Qike Jiang,
Ji Yang,
Yang Su, Leilei Zhang, Jian-Feng Li,* Zhong-Qun Tian, Wei Liu,* Aiqin Wang,* and Tao Zhang

Haifeng Qi,

Anqi Li,

⊥

⊥

⊥

Cite This: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 12062−12071

Read Online

ACCESS

Metrics & More

Article Recommendations

*sı Supporting Information

ABSTRACT: Restructuring is ubiquitous in thermocatalysis and
of pivotal importance to identify the real active site, yet it is less
explored in electrocatalysis. Herein, by using operando X-ray
absorption spectroscopy in conjunction with advanced electron
microscopy, we reveal the restructuring of the as-synthesized Cu−
N4 single-atom site to the nanoparticles of ∼5 nm during the
electrochemical reduction of nitrate to ammonia, a green ammonia
production route upon combined with the plasma-assisted
oxidation of nitrogen. The reduction of Cu2+ to Cu+ and Cu0
and the subsequent aggregation of Cu0 single atoms is found to
occur concurrently with the enhancement of the NH3 production
rate, both of them are driven by the applied potential switching
−1 h−1)
from 0.00 to −1.00 V versus RHE. The maximum production rate of ammonia reaches 4.5 mg cm−2 h−1 (12.5 molNH3 gCu
with a Faradaic eﬃciency of 84.7% at −1.00 V versus RHE, outperforming most of the other Cu catalysts reported previously. After
electrolysis, the aggregated Cu nanoparticles are reversibly disintegrated into single atoms and then restored to the Cu−N4 structure
upon being exposed to an ambient atmosphere, which masks the potential-induced restructuring during the reaction. The
synchronous changes of the Cu0 percentage and the ammonia Faradaic eﬃciency with the applied potential suggests that the Cu
nanoparticles are the genuine active sites for nitrate reduction to ammonia, which is corroborated with both the post-deposited Cu
NP catalyst and density functional theory calculations.

■ INTRODUCTION

Metal ions doped into porous nitrogen-doped carbon (M−N−
C), also called M−N−C single-atom catalysts (SACs), is a
class of promising electrocatalysts alternative to scarce and
unaﬀordable noble metals in a variety of energy-related
important transformations (e.g., oxygen and carbon dioxide
reduction reactions).1,2 The high activity of M−N−C is
generally attributed to the M−Nx site whose exact structure,
however, remains elusive. Especially, under working con-
the preformed M−Nx may undergo structural
ditions,
transformation driven by the applied potential and/or the
interaction with reactants or electrolytes, which not only
complicates the understanding of the structure−performance
relationship but also signiﬁcantly impedes the rational design
of eﬃcient catalysts. Therefore, unveiling the dynamic
evolution of the M−Nx structure during electrolysis is of
pivotal importance to identify the real active site. Recently,
with the advance of operando characterization techniques, in
particular operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy, there have
been increasing examples showing that the M−Nx single-atom
site structure was labile under electrochemical conditions.3 For
instance, Yao and co-workers reported the transformation of
the as-synthesized Co−N4 planar structure into a high-valence

HO−Co−N2 moiety by interacting with the electrolyte
hydroxide during the alkaline hydrogen evolution reaction
(HER),4 while Jaouen and co-workers observed the trans-
formation of the preformed FeN4C12 into iron oxide during the
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and this structural change
was the main reason for performance degradation.5 Compared
with Co−Nx and Fe−Nx moieties, the Cu−Nx appears more
susceptible to restructuring due to the more positive standard
electrode potential of Cu2+/Cu0 and Cu+/Cu0. Indeed, the
reduction of Cu cations together with the morphology change
was reported for various Cu-based catalysts during the
reduction,6−8 and the restructuring-
electrochemical CO2
induced activity enhancement was also observed.9,10 Very
recently, we have reported the dynamic evolution of Cu−N−C
SAC during ORR from the original Cu2+−N4 to Cu+−N3 and
to the HO−Cu+−N2 structure with the applied
further

Received: March 1, 2022
Published: June 29, 2022

© 2022 American Chemical Society

12062

https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.2c02262
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 12062−12071

Downloaded via UNIV OF ADELAIDE on June 29, 2024 at 09:00:14 (UTC).See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.Journal of the American Chemical Society

pubs.acs.org/JACS

Article

Figure 1. Structural characterizations of Cu−N−C SAC. (a) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image. (b) FT-EXAFS spectra of the Cu−N−C
catalyst and reference samples including Cu foil, Cu2O, CuO, and CuPc. (c) Cu K-edge XANES spectra of Cu−N−C and reference samples
including Cu foil, Cu2O, CuO, and CuPc. (d) Comparison between the experimental spectrum of Cu−N−C (black line) and the theoretical
spectrum of the Cu−N4 model (red line, inset, Cu−N4 structure).

potential switching from 1.1 to 0.1 V, and identiﬁed the latter
two structures were more favorable to ORR.11

Electrochemical ﬁxation of nitrogen (N2) powered by
renewable energy has emerged as a promising approach
toward green ammonia synthesis alternative to conventional
high energy-consuming12,13 and CO2-emission14 Haber−
Bosch process. Nevertheless, the high dissociation energy of
NN (941 kJ mol−1) and the limited solubility of nitrogen in
the aqueous solution lead to unacceptably low ammonia
selectivity and productivity in electrochemical nitrogen
ﬁxation.15,16 To overcome the intrinsic barrier of the direct
electrolysis of N2, we recently proposed a “plasma-electro-
catalysis” strategy17 by mimicking one of the natural nitrogen
cycles, in which the nitrogen is ﬁrst oxidized by non-thermal
plasma to reactive nitrogen species (RNS) which is usually
presented as water-soluble nitrate/nitrite species in aqueous
electrolytes,18 and then, the produced RNS is converted into
ammonia with a high selectivity and eﬃciency via electro-
chemical reduction. Therefore, it is keenly desired to develop
highly selective and durable electrocatalysts for RNS reduction
to ammonia. However, one challenge associated with this
electrochemical transformation involving the 8e−/9H+ transfer
process is the selectivity control because the reduction reaction
may stop at any intermediate step depending on the catalyst
structure as well as the applied potential.19−21 M−N−C SACs
with a well-deﬁned M−Nx structure have shown great
potentials in steering the nitrate reduction toward ammonia
based on recent reports.22−26 However, it remains an open
question whether the pre-formed M−Nx structure is stable at
highly reducing conditions applied, and if not, what is the
genuine active site structure for
this demanding electro-
chemical process?

Herein, with Cu−N−C SAC as a model catalyst and
operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy as the technique, we
present a detailed study on the evolution of active sites during

the electrochemical reduction of nitrate. With the applied
potential moving from 0.00 to −1.00 V versus RHE, the as-
synthesized Cu−N4 structure underwent successive trans-
formations from Cu−N3 to near-free Cu0 single atoms and
eventually to aggregated Cu0 nanoparticles. Concomitantly, the
ammonia production rate was steadily enhanced until the
−1 h−1) with a
maximum of 4.5 mg cm−2 h−1 (12.5 molNH3 gCu
Faradaic eﬃciency (FE) of 84.7% was reached at −1.00 V
versus RHE. The synchronous change of the Cu0 percentage
with the ammonia production rate suggests the potential-
induced evolution of Cu0 nanoparticles are the genuine active
sites, which is further supported by both the post-deposited Cu
NPs catalyst and density functional theory (DFT) calculations.
Moreover, the as-evolved Cu0 nanoparticles can be disinte-
grated into single atoms and again restored to the Cu−N4
structure upon being exposed to an ambient atmosphere after
the electrolysis, which highlights the great importance of the
operando characterizations.

■ RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Synthesis of Cu−N−C SAC and Electrochemical
Performance. The Cu−N−C SAC was synthesized with a
modiﬁed procedure according to our previously reported two-
step approach (Figure S1).11 The as-synthesized Cu−N−C is
featured with a large surface area (1065 m2 g−1), a high N
content (10.23 at. % N), and a mesoporous structure (Table
S1 and Figures S2 and S3). The Cu concentration in the Cu−
N−C is determined to be 1.0 wt % by inductively coupled
plasma optical emission spectroscopy. The single-atom
dispersion of Cu is visualized by aberration-corrected high-
angle annular dark-ﬁeld scanning transmission electron
microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging (Figure 1a and more
images see Figure S4), which is further corroborated with the
absence of the Cu−Cu scattering path in the extended X-ray
absorption ﬁne structure (EXAFS) spectrum (Figure 1b). The

12063

https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.2c02262
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 12062−12071

