Perspective
A Perspective on the Overarching Role of Hydrogen, Ammonia,
and Methanol Carbon-Neutral Fuels towards Net Zero Emission
in the Next Three Decades

Haifeng Liu 1
and Shuaishuai Wang 4,5

, Jeffrey Dankwa Ampah 1,*

, Yang Zhao 2, Xingyu Sun 3, Linxun Xu 3, Xueli Jiang 3

1

3

2

State Key Laboratory of Engines, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
Tianjin Yuetai Petroleum Technology Ltd., Co., Tianjin 300384, China
Shandong Chambroad New Energy Co., Ltd., Binzhou 256500, China
School of Future Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
Tianjin Xuandao Technology Co., Ltd., Tianjin 300384, China
* Correspondence: jeffampah@live.com or jeffampah@tju.edu.cn

5

4

Abstract: Arguably, one of the most important issues the world is facing currently is climate change.
At the current rate of fossil fuel consumption, the world is heading towards extreme levels of global
temperature rise if immediate actions are not taken. Transforming the current energy system from
one largely based on fossil fuels to a carbon-neutral one requires unprecedented speed. Based on the
current state of development, direct electriﬁcation of the future energy system alone is technically
challenging and not enough, especially in hard-to-abate sectors like heavy industry, road trucking,
international shipping, and aviation. This leaves a considerable demand for alternative carbon-neutral
fuels such as green ammonia and hydrogen and renewable methanol. From this perspective, we
discuss the overarching roles of each fuel in reaching net zero emission within the next three decades.
The challenges and future directions associated with the fuels conclude the current perspective paper.

Keywords: carbon-neutral fuels; decarbonization; hydrogen; ammonia; methanol

1. Introduction

As the catalyst for economic expansion and urbanization, industrialization has led
to the substantial development of several sectors of the global economy in conjunction
with a growth in world population and wealth [1,2]. The world population is projected
to grow to 9.9 billion in 2050 from 7.8 billion in 2020, creating an environment where
energy requirements increase by 80% [3,4]. The historical patterns of growth in human
population, activities, and energy demands have had a huge inﬂuence on the environment.
The Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii’s latest data suggests that the carbon dioxide (CO2)
in the atmosphere as of 2022 had exceeded 415 ppm, which represents approximately a
14% increase in less than 25 years when compared to the levels in 1997 [5]. It has been
projected that by 2050, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions will increase by 50%, mainly as a
consequence of the expected 70% increase in energy-related CO2 emissions [4,6]. At the
current rate of emission increase, the carbon cycle is likely to be pushed out of its dynamic
equilibrium, causing an irreversible change to the climate system [7].

Against this backdrop, several rounds of climate negotiations to tackle climate change
have been carried out by the international community. The adoption and signing of a series
of international treaties such as the Kyoto Protocol and the 2015 Paris Agreement has led to
real progress toward national climate change mitigation commitments. The Paris Agree-
ment for instance aims to limit global warming to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels [8].
However, compared to where current policies stand, a median warming of 2.6–3.1 degrees
Celsius by 2100 is more likely even if all parties were to deliver on their climate pledges [9].

Citation: Liu, H.; Ampah, J.D.; Zhao,

Y.; Sun, X.; Xu, L.; Jiang, X.; Wang, S.

A Perspective on the Overarching

Role of Hydrogen, Ammonia, and

Methanol Carbon-Neutral Fuels

towards Net Zero Emission in the

Next Three Decades. Energies 2023,

16, 280. https://doi.org/10.3390/

en16010280

Academic Editor: Attilio Converti

Received: 7 December 2022

Revised: 23 December 2022

Accepted: 23 December 2022

Published: 27 December 2022

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Energies 2023, 16, 280. https://doi.org/10.3390/en16010280

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

energiesEnergies 2023, 16, 280

2 of 15

Thus, more long-term stringent measures have to be put forward. According to the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the 1.5 °C goal requires a global realization
of net zero CO2 emissions by 2050—a goal collectively termed “reaching carbon neutrality”.
Carbon neutrality refers to the balance between CO2 emissions and absorptions within a
speciﬁc period to achieve “net zero emissions of carbon dioxide” [10]. Carbon neutrality
means the output of CO2 is offset by other approaches and thus has neutral effects on
the environment. Today, a total of 194 countries have joined the Paris Agreement [11].
Countries like the United Kingdom, Germany, Canada, France, South Africa, South Korea,
and Denmark have pledged to reach carbon neutrality by 2050, Iceland and Sweden by
2040 and 2045, respectively, China by 2060, India by 2070, and more countries are expected
to make similar pledges in the near future [12,13].

The development of carbon-neutral fuels is very crucial in reaching carbon neutral-
ity, especially in decarbonizing the major energy-consuming sectors such as heavy-duty
transport, power, industry, etc. [14–16]. Carbon-neutral fuels are carbon-based fuels that
do not increase the atmospheric CO2 when combusted. A net zero amount of atmospheric
carbon is achieved from the combustion of these fuels in the sense that they are typically
produced with CO2 as a key component in the process—implying that there is no net gain
of carbon in the atmosphere. There are several carbon-neutral fuels and all these fuels are
important to the realization of a net zero future. However, the remaining discussions in this
perspective paper are limited to green hydrogen, green ammonia, and renewable methanol.
There are several existing reviews on their production technologies and pathways such as
hydrogen [17–19], ammonia [20–22], and methanol [23–25]. Despite the key contributions
of such reviews, there is a limited holistic summary of the role of these fuels in reaching a
net zero future. Our current perspective is thus developed to provide a brief overview of
the interconnected roles of all three fuels. These are arguably the three most often consid-
ered carbon-neutral fuels to signiﬁcantly contribute to the realization of carbon neutrality
within the next three decades, especially in hard-to-abate sectors like long-range transport,
energy-intensive industry, and parts of residential heating. The coupling of these sectors
with the power sector through the production and consumption of these fuels helps solve
one of the most challenging tasks with renewable electricity generation (i.e., matching time
of generation to time of load consequently leading to energy curtailment), especially from
intermittent sources such as solar and wind energy. The technologies for their production
stage to end-use are well understood and have been around for quite some time albeit with
certain inherent challenges such as commercialization and large scale-up. Undoubtedly,
these three carbon-neutral fuels considered in this perspective have a crucial role to play
in reaching the 1.5 °C target by mid-century, and these roles and potential applications
will become apparent in the subsequent sections. Figure 1 highlights the energy transition
from today’s fossil fuel-dominated system to tomorrow’s net zero carbon emissions system
powered mainly by renewable energies and carbon-neutral fuels.

