Article
Weather Impact on Solar Farm Performance: A Comparative
Analysis of Machine Learning Techniques

Ajith Gopi 1,2, Prabhakar Sharma 3
and Erdem Cuce 7

, Kumarasamy Sudhakar 4,5,6,*, Wai Keng Ngui 4

, Irina Kirpichnikova 6

1

3

4

Energy Sustainability Research Group, Automotive Engineering Center, Universiti Malaysia Pahang,
Pekan 26600, Pahang, Malaysia

2 Agency for New and Renewable Energy Research and Technology (ANERT),

Thiruvananthapuram 695033, India
School of Engineering Sciences, Delhi Skill and Entrepreneurship University, Delhi 110089, India
Faculty of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering Technology, Universiti Malaysia Pahang,
Pekan 26600, Pahang, Malaysia

5 Centre of Excellence for Advancement Research Fluid Flow (Fluid Center), Universiti Malaysia Pahang,

Gambang 26300, Pahang, Malaysia

6 Department of Electric Power Stations, Network and Supply Systems, South Ural State University (National

Research University), 76 Prospekt Lenina, 454080 Chelyabinsk, Russia

7 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, Recep Tayyip Erdogan

University, Zihni Derin Campus, 53100 Rize, Turkey

* Correspondence: sudhakar@ump.edu.my; Tel.: +609-424-6249

Abstract: Forecasting the performance and energy yield of photovoltaic (PV) farms is crucial for
establishing the economic sustainability of a newly installed system. The present study aims to
develop a prediction model to forecast an installed PV system’s annual power generation yield
and performance ratio (PR) using three environmental input parameters: solar irradiance, wind
speed, and ambient air temperature. Three data-based artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques, namely,
adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), response surface methodology (RSM), and artiﬁcial
neural network (ANN), were employed. The models were developed using three years of data from
an operational 2MWp Solar PV Project at Kuzhalmannam, Kerala state, India. Statistical indices such
as Pearson’s R, coefﬁcient of determination (R2), root-mean-squared error (RMSE), Nash-Sutcliffe
efﬁciency (NSCE), mean absolute-percentage error (MAPE), Kling-Gupta efﬁciency (KGE), Taylor’s
diagram, and correlation matrix were used to determine the most accurate prediction model. The
results demonstrate that ANFIS was the most precise performance ratio prediction model, with an R2
value of 0.9830 and an RMSE of 0.6. It is envisaged that the forecast model would be a valuable tool
for policymakers, solar energy researchers, and solar farm developers.

Keywords: artificial intelligence; forecasting; solar irradiance; energy generation; solar plant; neuro-fuzzy

1. Introduction

Renewable energy is the best solution for mitigating the threats of climate change.
With technology making rapid advancements, the renewable energy sector has achieved
incredible progress in the last decade [1]. Since almost all renewable energy sources are
intermittent, improved forecasting and modeling of power resources becomes essential for
renewable energy to manage the grid effectively [2]. The vulnerabilities in the supply chain
of renewable energy must be smoothened to cope with the variabilities. The incorporation
of storage systems beneﬁts the large scale solar power developments [2]. Intelligent systems
can support the integration of renewables into the existing grid and make renewable energy
competitive in the current market. When artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is integrated into
renewable energy plants, the sensors and internet of things (IoT) devices can give new
insights to the grid operators. Hybridization and storage are also becoming popular

Citation: Gopi, A.; Sharma, P.;

Sudhakar, K.; Ngui, W.K.;

Kirpichnikova, I.; Cuce, E. Weather

Impact on Solar Farm Performance:

A Comparative Analysis of Machine

Learning Techniques. Sustainability

2023, 15, 439. https://doi.org/

10.3390/su15010439

Academic Editor: Kian Jon Chua

Received: 7 September 2022

Revised: 12 November 2022

Accepted: 14 November 2022

Published: 27 December 2022

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Sustainability 2023, 15, 439. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15010439

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

sustainabilitySustainability 2023, 15, 439

2 of 28

with solar Photovoltaic (PV) plants, which help the grid in the case of intermittency and
unreliability of the power source [3].

The increased acceptance of distributed energy resources in the grid necessitates
integrating AI techniques to control and optimize loads and manage the selection of
different renewable energy resources for meeting the loads based on availability. With
AI integration, microgrids and virtual power plants have become more dynamic and
intelligent [4]. Artiﬁcial intelligence can enhance the performance of solar power plants to
a greater level. The weather remains a signiﬁcant factor in inﬂuencing the generation of
renewable energy-based plants, such as solar and wind plants [5]. It is crucial to predict the
output of wind and solar PV plants for the demand and supply management of electricity
systems worldwide. Different AI techniques can predict PV plants’ performance precisely
and thus, improve efﬁciency and accessibility. AI can address the issues of variability in
renewable energy generation [6]. AI-based techniques offer a higher potential for predicting
both the weather and the performance of renewable energy [7]. AI techniques will learn
critical information patterns, avoiding the need for mathematical routines and complex
rules. Intelligent sensors and IoT systems are interconnected to collect vast amounts of
data [8].

1.1. Literature Review

Most of the published work on this topic is concerned with predicting solar radiation.
The power output of a PV-based solar farm/plant module, though, is affected by factors
other than solar irradiation. There has been little research on projecting PV-generated
electricity. Factors such as hardware (cell size, solar cell type, incidence angle, layout) and
weather conditions inﬂuence the electrical power output. In a PV system, for example,
the temperature of the solar cell inﬂuences the quantity of electricity generated. Solar
irradiation, ambient temperature, wind speed, and relative humidity affect the cell’s tem-
perature. Various researchers have made efforts to predict the power generated from a
solar PV plant by utilizing artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) tools like adaptive neuro-fuzzy infer-
ence system (ANFIS) [9], artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) [10], numerical regression [11],
support vector machines [3,12], and response surface methodology (RSM) [13] based on
weather categorization concepts. Shi et al. [14] used a support vector machine for weather
categorization to create a unique prediction model for estimating the power production of
a 20 MW PV facility. The prediction model had a prediction error of 8.46%. The study used
only the type of day (foggy, clear, rainy, and cloudy) as input. RSM was employed to create
a predictive model by Kazemian et al. [15] for a photovoltaic system. The correlations
between the characteristics above outputs, such as thermal, electrical energy, entropy, and
exergy, were determined by means of their interactions in system performance. In another
study, solar irradiation data from a township named Kermanshah in Iran was used to
predict solar radiation using three methodologies: ANFIS, ANN, and RSM. The results
were compared among themselves. The ﬁnding was that the prediction efﬁcacy of RSM
was marginally superior compared to the neural network [16].

In a more extensive study by Mellit et al. [17], a year’s data was used to anticipate the
electricity generated by a 50 W PV plant. ANN was used for model training and prediction.
This study was intended to predict only day power generation with an error range of
4.38% to 31.01%. Deep learning neural networks (NNs) are also suggested for prediction
and modeling. Because of the potential to maintain prior time-series data employing
the memory architecture, the long short-term memory (LSTM) technique was used to
predict PV power generation [18]. When applied to 21 examined PV plants, LSTM and
auto-encoders proved more efﬁcient in power prediction than multi-layer perceptron and
physical prediction approaches [19]. A hybrid approach of fuzzy decision and neural
networks was employed to model-predict the photovoltaic-based power generation at two
different sites in Mexico [20]. The study conducted at Hermosillo and Mexico City in the
Sonora State of Mexico proved that the ANFIS method provides more accurate results than
the conventional statistical methods.

