Materials Today d Volume 69 d October 2023

RESEARCH

Electrocatalytic seawater splitting: Nice
designs, advanced strategies, challenges
and perspectives
Jie Liang a, Zixiao Li a, Xun He a, Yongsong Luo a, Dongdong Zheng a, Yan Wang a,
Tingshuai Li a, Binwu Ying a, Shengjun Sun b, Zhengwei Cai b, Qian Liu c, Bo Tang b,d,⇑,
Xuping Sun a,b,⇑

w
e
i
v
e
R

:

H
C
R
A
E
S
E
R

a Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, Sichuan, China
b College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, Shandong, China
c Institute for Advanced Study, Chengdu University, Chengdu 610106, Sichuan, China
d Laoshan Laboratory, Qingdao 266237, Shandong, China

H2 has a sufﬁciently high energy density and a combustion process that emits no carbon, therefore
being an appealing storable alternative to fossil fuels. With evident advantages of seawater resources
available worldwide, electrochemically making H2 from seawater holds a great development prospect
towards the global deployment of H2-based energy plants. However, with current water splitting
technologies, this is not an easy task, and the primary obstacle is impurities in natural seawater
including halide salts, magnesium salts, organic matter, etc., which readily cause the electrocatalysis
systems to shut down. We herein present a timely review of seawater electrolysis systems at both lab-
scale fundamental research and pilot-scale reactor level on the basis of most representative studies. We
analyze some of the crucial experimental details that are frequently ignored, such as seawater
treatments, product detection, electrode assembly, reactors, electrolyte feeding modes, etc. We then
systematically emphasize the latest and representative strategies and catalytic materials designs as well
as whether corresponding electrodes are genuinely stable as two key quests to ﬁnd out truly reliable
and exploitable electrode engineering. Gas release behaviors/kinetics at high reaction rates are
highlighted as well. In addition, we introduce valuable contents like how to learn from ocean life for
electrocatalytic system design. We conclude by taking a look at the future research directions and
opportunities
systems/
technologies.

for encouraging more practical applications of

seawater electrolysis

Keywords: Green hydrogen economy; Seawater electrolysis; Electrocatalysts; Self-reconstruction; Membrane

Introduction
Limited fossil fuel (LFF) supplies and ecological damages that
their exploitation causes are calling for gradual upgrades of our
energy landscape, which is currently dominated by the LFF, to
renewable energy source-based production of chemicals and

⇑ Corresponding authors.

(xpsun@sdnu.edu.cn).

E-mail addresses: Tang, B. (tangb@sdnu.edu.cn), Sun, X. (xpsun@uestc.edu.cn), Sun, X.

fuels (e.g., through Power-to-X) [1]. Hydrogen (H2) is a key feed-
stock to various sectors including Haber-Bosch process, petro-
leum reﬁning, steelmaking, etc., and is a widely accepted
energy carrier with clean combustion [2–5]. While the H2
demand has soared since 2000 and was approximately 90 million
metric tons in 2020, over 90% of that H2 has came from energy-
intensive and carbon-emitting technologies like natural gas
reforming [3]. The hard trade-off between the current unsustain-

1369-7021/(cid:1) 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2023.08.024

193

RESEARCH

Materials Today d Volume 69 d October 2023

R
E
S
E
A
R
C
H

:

R
e
v
i
e
w

able H2 production for the increasing H2-related market and fast
LFF depletion lead us to develop low-carbon H2-based energy
transition. Electrosynthesis of H2 directly from ultra-high-
purity water, powered by renewable energy, is green enough
[6], but even if generating H2 from water permits small water
demand ((cid:1)9 kg H2O/kg H2) [3], the Net zero Emissions Scenario
in the future will result in an enormous rise in the volume of
fresh water consumed for water splitting activities. It is known
that although water covers about 70% of our planet, a tiny frac-
tion of just (cid:1) 2.5% is freshwater, and two thirds of that is either
frozen in glaciers or inaccessible to humans in some other ways.
Moreover importantly, fresh water resources are not evenly dis-
tributed around the world. The spatial distribution of rainfall
(Fig. 1a) and the local climate type are the key determinants of
the distribution of water resources [7]. One of the primary prob-
lems in numerous countries across the world, including Kuwait,
Libya, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, the Republic of Yemen, Israel, Tuni-
sia, Algeria, Burundi, etc., is a lack of water. Since lots of desalina-
tion plants have been built at great cost in the countries that lack
freshwater resources (Fig. 1b) [8], it will be scarcely possible to
electrolyze hard-won freshwater to make H2 there.

Electrolysis of seawater to make H2 (Fig. 1e) is a viable option
in that vast seawater resources guarantee a solid foundation for
such conversion. Moreover, many countries, including China,
USA, India, Australia, and others, are developing renewable
energy sources such as solar, wind, and geothermal energy
(Fig. 1c) [9]. These countries have broad coastlines and lots of
coastal cities, making large-scale seawater electrolysis powered
by renewable energy highly attractive and easier to achieve. In
fact, in addition to these countries, other countries with seawater
resources can also rely on electrolysis to produce H2, since
deploying H2 energy plants along the coast will signiﬁcantly
lower overall infrastructure and transportation costs. In addition,
the locations and distribution of hydrogen ﬁlling stations around
the world are not uniform, with the majority being centered in
the United States and Japan (Fig. 1d) [10]. One the other hand,
although water crisis is merely a vague idea to some people,
the scarcity of life-sustaining water is putting people in water
shortage regions at risk. In fact, seawater electrolysis, coupled
with H2-O2 fuel cell technologies, are sustainable when used as
an alternative possible solution for future on-site desalinizing
saltwater into pure water. Accordingly, success in efﬁciently elec-
trolyzing seawater would be a vital step in the worldwide deploy-
ment of clean energy technologies by exploiting ocean as the
globe-spanning H2 resources. Before starting this review, good
review papers that are already available in this ﬁeld are recom-
mended for readers [11–21]. This article gives a summary of the
most recent advances in the ﬁeld as well as previously ignored
ﬁndings.

(cid:3)

, Br

Various impurities present in natural seawater, mostly induc-
ing solid particles, microorganisms, organic matter, Ca2+, Mg2+,
(cid:3)
, and so forth, nonetheless, make the efﬁcient and
Sr2+, Cl
long-term generation of H2 from seawater rather challenging.
No matter how an electrolytic reactor is constructed, seawater
electrolysis must occur there in order to obtain high-purity H2.
The anode, cathode and membrane are core parts of the reactor,
but they are also the ones most vulnerable to pollution, corro-
sion, or poisoning from these impurities. Since natural saltwater

194

(cid:3)

(cid:3)2 at ƞ

contains little H+/ OH
, the larger current densities (J), the more
milky cathode precipitation (caused by pH drop) as well as the
more severe anode corrosion (damaged by halide ions and more
derived species). Direct oxidation of natural seawater would be
ideal, yet since the pH is close to neutral and halide ions far out-
–
number OH
, the selectivity of O2 would be limited. Some studies
added used buffered seawater to attain relatively better perfor-
mances, like seawater + 1 M KOH + 1 M phosphate (KPi) + 1 M
borate (KBi) adopted by Nocera’s group [22] as well as seawa-
ter + NaH2PO4 + Na2HPO4 (pH adjusted to 7) adopted by groups
of Qiao and Liu [23]. Though such buffering seawater electrolytes
may afford smaller pH gradients across the electrolytic cell and
better catalyst performance, adding salts into seawater and then
ﬁltering actually has two little issues. (i) One-step seawater split-
ting becomes two-step pre-treated seawater (less Ca2+/Mg2+) split-
ting. (ii) Salts need to be added regularly to ensure stable
reaction. Such issues are even more pronounced for alkalized sea-
water, because making seawater alkaline consumes KOH prior to
the electrolysis. Even if some work removes Ca2+/Mg2+ using rel-
atively cheaper salts (e.g., Na2CO3) and then adds NaOH/KOH to
create alkalinity, direct electrolysis of natural seawater turns into
indirect electrolysis of alkaline seawater. Materials that can afford
high J at overpotentials<480 mV (ƞ < ƞ480,) are being sought and
designed for catalysis under alkaline seawater conditions
(pH > 7.5 [11]) in that alkaline media can block chlorine electro-
chemistry at certain potentials. While it is possible to design such
catalysts and some progress has been made (e.g., NF/NiMoN@Ni-
398, 1 M KOH + natural seawater [24]), artiﬁ-
FeN, 1 A cm
cially alkalizing seawater adds the complexity and energy
penalty for industrial applications. Note that even though
roughly 30% KOH solution is employed in industrial electrolysis
of water, the catalysts in alkaline saltwater will degrade more
quickly if it is overly alkaline (e.g., 6 M KOH + seawater [25]).
Acidic seawater electrolysis is a different route with certain ben-
eﬁts like less precipitation and faster hydrogen evolution reac-
tion (HER), yet it faces new issues (unsuppressed chloride
oxidation and acid etching). At present, relevant studies based
on acidic seawater are rare [26]. Though one-step direct electrol-
ysis has much simpler equipment, it now has stricter require-
ments for both electrodes and membranes. Clearly, the cost-
effectiveness of direct electrolysis can only be higher than indi-
rect electrolysis if both the electrode and the membrane are dur-
able enough. While OH
concentrations in natural seawater are
small, orders of magnitude lower than those in alkaline elec-
trolytes, it is possible to directly electrolyze natural seawater at
a good efﬁciency adopting appropriate catalyst designs (e.g., cat-
alyst: Cr2O3-CoOx, seawater: pH = 7.9, without solids/microor-
(cid:3)2 at 1.99 V with 75% iR compensation in
ganisms, J: 0.4 A cm
(cid:3)2 at 2.33 V in a proton
a single-compartment cell, J: 1 A cm
exchange membrane (PEM)-based ﬂow-type electrolyzer [27]).
Alternatively, unconventional
systems
(SESs) also exhibit great potential for cost-effective H2 produc-
tion. Overall, since residual cations and more unwanted anionic
ions will still be present after chemical pre-precipitation treat-
ment, H2-evolving and O2-evolving catalysts that show high
selectivity and durability even in impure seawater electrolytes
with impurity ions are highly desirable.

seawater electrolysis

–

