Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rser 

Recent advancement and assessment of green hydrogen 
production technologies 

Bidattul Syirat Zainal a,*, Pin Jern Ker a, Hassan Mohamed a, Hwai Chyuan Ong b, 
I.M.R. Fattah c, **, S.M. Ashrafur Rahman d, Long D. Nghiem c, T M Indra Mahlia c 
a Institute of Sustainable Energy, Universiti Tenaga Nasional, Jalan IKRAM-UNITEN, 43000, Kajang, Selangor, Malaysia 
b School of Engineering and Technology, Sunway University, Jalan Universiti, Bandar Sunway, 47500, Petaling Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia 
c Centre for Technology in Water and Wastewater, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of 
Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2007, Australia 
d Biofuel Engine Research Facility, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, QLD, 4000, Australia   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Hydrogen colours 
Green hydrogen 
Hydrogen economy 
Renewable energy 
Hydrogen production technologies 
Solid oxide electrolysis cell 
Anion exchange membrane 
Electrified steam methane reforming 

Hydrogen energy has garnered substantial support from industry, government, and the public, positioning it as a 
pivotal future fuel source. However, its commercial realisation faces significant hurdles, including slow infra-
structure growth and the high cost of producing clean hydrogen. This review uniquely emphasises the different 
colour  codes  of  hydrogen,  which  have  been  rarely  discussed  in  the  literature  to  date.  Hydrogen  production 
methods are classified by colour codes, with green hydrogen, produced from renewable sources such as wind and 
solar,  being  the  most  desirable  option.  The  demand  for  green  hydrogen  across  various  sectors  is  expected  to 
surge.  This  review  comprehensively  evaluates  the  major  hydrogen  production  methods  based  on  cost,  envi-
ronmental  impact,  and  technological  maturity.  Recent  data  confirm  the  increased  efficiency,  cost- 
competitiveness,  and  scalability  of  green  hydrogen  production  technologies.  The  cost  of  green  hydrogen  has 
declined significantly, making it competitive with blue hydrogen (produced from fossil fuels with carbon cap-
ture).  The  review  also  scrutinises  several  recent  hydrogen  production  technologies,  highlighting  their  advan-
tages, disadvantages, and technological readiness. Among these, the solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) currently 
outperforms others, with  anion exchange membrane (AEM)  and electrified steam methane reforming  (ESMR) 
also showing promise. This review also succinctly summarises global progress in hydrogen infrastructure and 
policies. By spotlighting the diverse colour codes of hydrogen and discussing the crucial takeaways and impli-
cations  for  the  future,  this  review  offers  a  comprehensive  overview  of  the  hydrogen  energy  landscape.  This 
unique focus enriches the literature and enhances our understanding of hydrogen as a promising energy source.   

1. Introduction 

Global  greenhouse  gaseous  (GHG)  emission  has  surged  to  their 
highest level in history [1], presenting an existential threat to human-
kind as global warming continues to exacerbate. Among all human ac-
tivities, burning fossil fuels for energy is the most significant contributor 
to GHG increase, particularly carbon dioxide. The heat from the sun was 
then trapped by the GHGs, raising the temperature. Therefore, the main 
goals of the 2015 Paris Agreement are to try to limit the temperature 
◦
increase to 1.5 
C and to make a more vigorous global effort to address 
climate change by keeping the temperature increase this century below 

◦
C above pre-industrial levels [2]. Hence, countries worldwide agreed 
2 
that reducing carbon emissions is required to prevent the harmful effects 
of climate change, such as coral reef destructions, heatwaves, frequent 
wildfires and floods, droughts, and rising sea levels. Various solutions 
have been discussed, including transitioning to renewable energy for a 
sustainable future, as renewable energy is an abundant and continuously 
replenished natural resource. 

Solar,  hydro,  wind,  biomass,  and  biogas  are  sustainable  energy 
sources that do not deplete and will not cause long-term harmful envi-
ronmental effects. Sustainable energy requires energy conservation, ef-
ficiency, and renewable energy to reduce climate change and protect the 
environment. Hydrogen has great potential to be an essential part of a 

* Corresponding author. 
** Corresponding author. 

E-mail addresses: biddatul@uniten.edu.my (B.S. Zainal), IslamMdRizwanul.Fattah@uts.edu.au (I.M.R. Fattah).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2023.113941 
Received 6 April 2023; Received in revised form 12 October 2023; Accepted 17 October 2023   

RenewableandSustainableEnergyReviews189(2024)113941Availableonline2November20231364-0321/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.B.S. Zainal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Nomenclatures 

Air reactor AR 
Anion exchange membrane AEM 
Australian Renewable Energy Agency ARENA 
Autothermal reforming ATR 
Battery electric vehicle BEV 
Bio-electrochemical systems BESs 
Biological water gas shift reaction BWGS 
Carbon capture and storage CCS 
Carbon capture, storage, and use CCUS 
Catalytic partial oxidation CPOX 
Department of Energy DOE 
Dry reforming DR 
Electric vehicles EV 
Electrified steam methane reforming ESMR 
Electrochemical catalytic coal gasification ECG 
Energy Information Administration EIA 
Environmental, social, and governance ESG 
European Union EU 
Fuel cell electric vehicles FCEVs 
Gas hourly space velocity GHSV 
Greenhouse gas GHG 
Gross domestic product GDP 
High heating value HHV 
Hydrogen energy technology HET 
International Energy Agency IEA 
International Renewable Energy Agency IRENA 
Levelised cost of energy LCOE 
Life cycle assessment LCA 
Light intensity Lux 
Methane pyrolysis MP 
Microbial electrolysis cells MECs 
Microbial fuel cells MFCs 
Million metric tonnes per year MMTPA 
Monodisperse iron oxide nanoparticles IONPs 
Net Zero Emissions NZE 
Partial oxidation POX 
Partial oxidation of ethanol POE 
Photovoltaic PV 
Polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis PEMEL 
Proton exchange membrane PEM 
Research and development R&D 
SMR with CCS SMR-CCS 
Solid oxide electrolysis cells SOEC 
Steam methane reforming SMR 
Technology Readiness Level TRL 
Thermal decomposition TD 
Thermochemical water-splitting cycle TWSC 
Water-gas shift WGS 

Symbols/Molecular formulae/Units 
(cid:0)
Acetate  CH3COO
Acetic acid CH3COOH 
Atmospheric pressure atm 
Australian dollar A$ 
(cid:0)
Bicarbonate HCO3
Butanoic acid CH3CH2CH2COOH 

Calcium oxide CaO 
Canadian dollar CAD 
Capacitive current density mA/cm2 
Carbon dioxide CO2 
Carbon monoxide CO 
Cerium(IV) oxide CeO2 
Chromium Cr 
Cobalt 
Co 
Celenium Ce 
Cubic meters m3 
◦
Degree Celcius
C 
Deuterium isotope 2H 
Dimethyl ether DME 
Enthalpy change ΔH 
Ethanol  C2H5OH 
Exajoule EJ 
Gamma-alumina γ-Al2O3 
Gibbs’s energy ΔG 
Gigawatt/gigatonnes GW/GT 
Glucose  C6H12O6 
Hybrid sulphur HyS 
Hydrogen H2 
Hydrogen peroxide H2O2 
Hydronium ion H
(cid:0)
Hydroxide ions OH
Indian rupee crore INR Cr 
Iron 
Fe 
Iron (III) oxide Fe3O4 
Kilojoules/mol kJ/mol 
Megajoule MJ 
Megajoule per cubic meter MJ/m3 
Megapascal MPa 
Methane CH4 
Methanol CH3OH 
Metric tonne Mt 
N–Methyl–2–pyrrolidone NMP 
Nanoparticles of metal sulfides (zinc sulfide/cadmium sulfide) ZnS/ 

+

CdS 

Nickel  Ni 
Nickel (II) chloride hexahydrate NiCl2.6H2O 
Oxygen  O2 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons PAHs 
Potassium carbonate K2CO3 
Potassium hydroxide KOH 
Propane  C3H8 
Protium isotope 1H 
+
Hydrogen proton H
Rhodium Rh 
Sodium-borohydride NaBH4 
Standard enthalpy of formation H
Terawatt hour TWh 
Tetrahydrofuran THF 
Tritium isotope 3H 
United States Dollar (USD) $ 
Vanadium-chlorine V–Cl 
H2O 
Water 
V  
Volt 

298 

◦

RenewableandSustainableEnergyReviews189(2024)1139412