RES EARCH

ELECTROCHEMISTRY

La- and Mn-doped cobalt spinel oxygen evolution
catalyst for proton exchange membrane electrolysis

Lina Chong1, Guoping Gao2, Jianguo Wen3, Haixia Li2, Haiping Xu1, Zach Green4, Joshua D. Sugar5,
A. Jeremy Kropf1, Wenqian Xu6, Xiao-Min Lin3, Hui Xu4, Lin-Wang Wang2, Di-Jia Liu1,7*

Discovery of earth-abundant electrocatalysts to replace iridium for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER)
in a proton exchange membrane water electrolyzer (PEMWE) represents a critical step in reducing the
cost for green hydrogen production. We report a nanofibrous cobalt spinel catalyst codoped with
lanthanum (La) and manganese (Mn) prepared from a zeolitic imidazolate framework embedded in
electrospun polymer fiber. The catalyst demonstrated a low overpotential of 353 millivolts at 10
milliamperes per square centimeter and a low degradation for OER over 360 hours in acidic electrolyte.
A PEMWE containing this catalyst at the anode demonstrated a current density of 2000 milliamperes
per square centimeter at 2.47 volts (Nafion 115 membrane) or 4000 milliamperes per square centimeter
at 3.00 volts (Nafion 212 membrane) and low degradation in an accelerated stress test.

L ow-temperature water electrolysis can

rapidly produce environmentally sus-
tainable, or green, hydrogen and is a
prospective means of storing energy from
renewable but intermittent power sources,
such as wind and solar, in future clean energy
infrastructure (1–4). Commercial systems use
either liquid alkaline electrolyte or proton ex-
change membrane electrolyte (1). Compared
with the alkaline counterpart, a proton ex-
change membrane water electrolyzer (PEMWE)
offers the advantages of higher current density,
higher H2 purity, lower resistance losses, and
more compact design, rendering it a preferred
technology where high efficiency and small
footprint are essential (1, 2). Working under
the acidic and oxidative environment, how-
ever, adds substantial challenges to the catalyst
activity and stability profile. This is particularly
the case for the anode catalyst because of the
high overpotential for oxygen evolution reac-
tion (OER) (3). At present, OER catalysts for
PEMWE are primarily restricted to the plat-
inum group metal (PGM) materials, such as
IrOx (1). Their high cost and limited reserve,
however, pose substantial barriers to the wide-
spread implementation of PEMWE. Low-cost
transition metals and their oxides are known
to be active toward OER in alkaline electrolyte
(4–6), but their demonstration in acidic elec-
trolyte is very limited (1, 7, 8).

Cobalt molecular and oxide compounds have
emerged as promising OER catalysts for water

1Chemical Science and Engineering Division, Argonne
National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA. 2Material
Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 3Center for Nanoscale Materials,
Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA.
4Giner Inc., Auburndale, MA 02466, USA. 5Sandia National
Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA. 6X-ray Science
Division, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National
Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA. 7Pritzker School of
Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL 60637, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: djliu@anl.gov

splitting in recent years (9). Kanan and Nocera
systematically investigated water oxidation
using a catalyst deposited from Co2+ solution
in pH 7 phosphate buffer (10). Gerken et al.
performed a comprehensive mechanistic study
of cobalt-catalyzed water oxidation from homo-
geneous to heterogeneous phases in electrolyte
over a broad pH range of 0 to 14 (11). Those
studies have provided profound understanding
of electrocatalytic oxygen evolution by cobalt.
More recently, thin film spinel-type Co3O4 was
found to be active toward OER and stable at
low overpotential in acid (12). The activity and
stability of Co oxide were improved substan-
tially when modified with iron, manganese,
antimonite, and PbOx (13–15). In addition to
activity and stability, the inherent conductivity
represents an essential requirement for ef-
ficient OER electrocatalysis to overcome the
insulating properties of most transition metal
oxides in their crystalline form. Conventional
carbon supports, used to facilitate the elec-
tron conductivity, are not stable against oxi-
dation to CO2 at the PEMWE anode under
OER operating potential. For example, a Co-
polyoxometalate composited with carbon paste
achieved a lower OER onset potential than
IrO2 in 1 M sulfuric acid but decayed quickly,
presumably as a result of oxidative corrosion
of the carbon (16). Self-conductive oxide cat-
alysts can also enhance the active -site volu-
metric density without being diluted by a
secondary nonactive support. A recently devel-
oped self-healing OER catalyst has demon-
strated excellent activity and durability in
acidic electrolyte (14). The approach, however,
requires the presence of metal precursors in
the aqueous electrolyte, hindering integration
into a PEMWE. Most of the aforementioned
studies were carried out either in half-cells or
aqueous electrolyzers, where the demands for
OER catalyst stability and conductivity are
different from those in a PEMWE. For exam-
ple, the dissolved transition metal concentra-

tion must be minimized to avoid poisoning the
proton exchange membrane in the PEMWE.
Effective OER for PEMWE requires optimal
interfacial properties, microporosity, and sur-
face catalytic activity (1), all of which need to be
validated in the operating electrolyzer.

In this work, we present a cobalt spinel–
based OER catalyst derived from a zeolitic
methyl-imidazolate framework (Co-ZIF) and
processed by electrospinning. The catalyst
demonstrated excellent OER activity ben-
efiting from its high specific surface area,
porous interconnected nanonetwork structure,
and high conductivity.

Design of an acid-stable cobalt OER catalyst

Our design concept of an efficient cobalt
spinel–based OER catalyst for PEMWE anodes
is based on the following rationale: To en-
hance OER activity in acid, an oversized and
more stable second element can be selectively
introduced to the cobalt oxide surface to
generate strain, oxygen vacancy (Vo), and acid
tolerance (17); to improve the oxide electronic
conductivity, a third element with similar
charge and dimension to cobalt may be in-
corporated inside the lattice to bridge the
Fermi bandgap through d orbital partial oc-
cupation of the third element induced by its
d-electron delocalization. Advancing further
from the rotating disk electrode (RDE) or half-
cell study to a membrane electrode assembly
(MEA) demonstration, the catalyst should
have a high porosity and surface area easily
accessible to the reactant (H2O). Meanwhile,
the electrode layer should be effective in trans-
porting H2O and releasing O2 without blocking
the water-catalyst interface. Furthermore, the
oxide catalyst should be self-conductive with-
out the need for another conductive support,
such as carbon, that is unstable under high
OER operating potential and current density.
Finally, the metal oxide should be stable against
oxidative and acidic (pH 2 to 4) corrosion in
the PEMWE environment.

We selected Co-ZIF as the precursor for the
catalyst preparation because of its high intrin-
sic porosity and reticular structure. It has re-
cently been used to prepare a nanoplate oxide
with excellent OER activity tested in strong
alkaline electrolyte (1 M KOH) using the RDE
method (18). Our catalyst preparation through
low-temperature oxidation partially retained
the porosity and morphology of Co-ZIFs after
their conversion into interconnected hollow
metal oxide particles, providing an excellent
platform for enhanced charge and mass transfer.
Among different elements that we screened,
we selected lanthanum (La3+) as the second
element because of its much larger radius
compared with that of Co2+ (1.06 Å versus
0.72 Å) along with its strong affinity to bind
−OH groups at the surface of cobalt oxide. We
also added manganese ions (Mn2+) of similar

Chong et al., Science 380, 609–616 (2023)

12 May 2023

1 of 8

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on June 29, 2024RES EARCH | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E

A

Co-ZIF

+ Mn(II)

+ La(III)

B

F

Electrospinning

ZIF in Polymer Nanofiber

Interconnected Porous Oxide

E-spin

Activation

C

G

D

H

E

I

La

Mn

Fig. 1. Synthesis, morphology, and structure of LMCF. (A) Schematics of
LMCF synthesis including formation of Co-ZIF embedded PAN polymer fiber by
electrospinning and thermal oxidative activation to produce interconnected
porous cobalt oxide particles after removing all the organics. The background
SEM images show a cross-linked, ZIF-containing fiber nanonetwork produced by
electrospinning and the interconnected porous oxide after the activation.
(B) SEM image (scale bar, 1 mm). (C) HAADF-STEM image (scale bar, 500 nm).
(D) TEM image (scale bar, 200 nm). (E) HRTEM image (scale bar, 5 nm).

(F to H) STEM image and the corresponding La and Mn distributions
(scale bar, 2 nm). The color bars show the element counts. The maximal counts are
321 for La and 142 for Mn. (I) HRTEM image (scale bar, 0.5 nm). The green dots
represent atomic columns of tetrahedral (T) and octahedral (O) oxygens, and the red
dots represent the cobalt atomic columns simulated based on bulk phase inside
lattice. The dotted yellow ellipses (on surface) show a different orientation compared
with the solid yellow ellipses from the simulation (in bulk), suggesting a shift of
oxygen position as a result of lattice relaxation.

radius to Co2+ (0.8 Å versus 0.72 Å) during the
Co-ZIF synthesis, which would be oxidized to
Mn3+ (0.72 Å) during the oxidative conversion
and uniformly distributed inside the cobalt
spinel lattice to promote conductivity (via
bandgap) and OER activity (via affinity OH
or H group). The catalyst synthesis scheme is
shown in Fig. 1A. Briefly, La- and Mn-doped
Co-ZIF, LaMn@Co-ZIF, was prepared in solu-
tion. Powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) combined
with scanning electron microscopy (SEM)–
energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX)
elemental mapping confirmed the successful
incorporation of atomic La and Mn into the
structure and cavity of the Co-ZIF (fig. S1).

The LaMn@Co-ZIF was then suspended in a
polyacrylonitrile (PAN) polymer slurry (LaMn@
Co-ZIF/PAN) (19), which was subsequently
electrospun into a fibrous mat. The nanofiber
embedded with individual LaMn@Co-ZIF was
activated in flowing air at 360°C for 6 hours to
remove the organic components, forming La-
and Mn-codoped porous cobalt spinel fibers
(denoted LMCF). Thermogravimetric analysis
(TGA) confirmed the removal of carbon and
nitrogen in LMCF after oxidative activation
(fig. S2). The SEM image of LMCF shows an
interconnected nanofibrous network mor-
phology with ample macropores in between
the entwined nanofibers (Fig. 1B). High-angle

annular dark-field scanning transmission
electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) revealed
that individual LMCF particles retained the
original Co-ZIF’s rhombic dodecahedral shape,
aligned and fused together in strings after
oxidation (Fig. 1C). The ZIF-shaped LMCF
particle is highly porous with a hollow struc-
ture composed of nanopores, as shown by
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig.
1D). Each particle is composed of aggregates of
Co3O4 nanocrystallites, with an average size of
~3.5 nm, determined by aberration-corrected
high-resolution transmission electron micros-
copy (HRTEM) (Fig. 1E and fig. S3). Nitrogen
adsorption measurement of LMCF at 77 K

Chong et al., Science 380, 609–616 (2023)

12 May 2023

2 of 8

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on June 29, 2024