IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. 9, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

2583

Voltage Sensorless Based Model Predictive Control
With Battery Management System: For Solar PV
Powered On-Board EV Charging

Nishant Kumar

, Senior Member, IEEE, Bhim Singh, Fellow, IEEE,

and Bijaya Ketan Panigrahi

, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— This work deals with a novel voltage sensorless
based model predictive control (VSPC) scheme for continuous
and quick maximum power harvesting (MPH) from a photo-
voltaic (PV) array for a solar-powered on-board electric vehicle
(EV) charging system. In VSPC, the ﬁrst model predictive control
(MPC) is used with a PV array to predict the system state in the
horizon of time and to eliminate the voltage sensor. An adaptive
concept is used for deciding the operating point, which accelerates
the tracking process and improves dynamic performance during
irradiation changes and shading pattern changes in partially
shaded conditions. Moreover, VSPC also takes care of the EV
charging process using the EV-provided battery management
system (BMS) command or threshold safety limits of the EV
battery. The working principle of VSPC is based on a prediction
of the future behavior of the system. It realizes on a selected time
horizon, in an arbitrary number of samples, which is decided
according to the complexity of the ﬁtness function. In order to
minimize or maximize the ﬁtness function, it predicts the voltage
of the solar PV array as well as tunes the present control signal,
which forces it to converge or reach the convergence criteria.
Moreover, the cost and response time of current sensors are lower
than voltage sensors. Therefore, the VSPC control gives a fast
response and low power oscillations in steady-state compared to
conventional techniques. This control technique is veriﬁed on a
developed prototype of the PV system in different shading and
irradiance conditions, as well as the system stability, is analyzed
through the Bode plot. The system performance is also compared
with the state-of-the-art methods.

Index Terms— Battery management system (BMS), electric
vehicle (EV), maximum power point tracking (MPPT), model
predictive control
(MPC), partial shading condition, photo-
voltaic (PV), solar powered EV (SP-EV), voltage sensor-less.

I. INTRODUCTION

N OWADAYS, the application of solar photovoltaic (PV)

power has grown substantially. On low power ratings
in residential areas and high power ratings in commercial
levels, as well as in aerospace equipment, solar PV arrays are
used very frequently [1]. Moreover, to avoid fossil fuel, solar-
powered electric vehicle (SP-EV) is used. In each system,
the user wants to harvest maximum and quality power from
the PV panel. Here the meaning of quality is oscillations-free

Manuscript received 15 March 2022; revised 30 April 2022, 9 July 2022,
and 29 September 2022; accepted 6 October 2022. Date of publication
10 October 2022; date of current version 13 June 2023. This work was sup-
ported by the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Government
of India-National Science Chair (NSC) Fellowship. (Corresponding author:
Nishant Kumar.)

Nishant Kumar is with the Electrical Engineering Department, IIT Jodhpur,

Jodhpur 342011, India (e-mail: nishantkumar@iitj.ac.in).

Bhim Singh and Bijaya Ketan Panigrahi are with the Electrical Engineering

Department, IIT Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TTE.2022.3213253

power in the steady-state and quick response during dynamic
conditions, which is only possible through a strong maximum
power harvesting (MPH) technique.

For MPH, one needs a global maximum power point
tracking (GMPPT) algorithm. Because the power–voltage or
power–current characteristic of the PV array consists of a
nonlinear nature [2], [3]. Therefore,
the maximum power
exists, only on a single voltage and a single current on PV
characteristics [4]. An exhaustive literature survey reveals
that for GMPPT, several techniques have been proposed such
as hill-climbing [5], perturb and observe (P&O) [6], and
incremental conductance (InC) [7]. However, according to the
situation, these techniques are unable to decide an optimal
step size. Therefore, these techniques are suffered from steady-
state oscillation and longer tracking duration issues. Because,
a small step size gives a good steady-state performance, while
it takes a longer time to reach the maximum power peak (MPP)
during the dynamic condition. Similarly, a large step size
gives a good dynamic performance, while during the steady-
state condition, it creates oscillations in the output. Moreover,
these
during sudden and large irradiation fall conditions,
techniques lose the tracking direction. A few techniques have
been proposed to solve these issues, such as modiﬁed P&O
(MP&O) [8], modiﬁed InC, improved P&O [9], improved
InC, etc. However, no one algorithm is perfect for all types
of situations. Few techniques have oscillation-free steady-
state performance, but the performances are very poor during
dynamic conditions. Some algorithms have good tracking
capability in a dynamic condition, but during a steady-state
condition produce oscillation in the output. Some of them
have an optimal solution for both steady-state and dynamic
conditions. However, computational burden and large design
dependences are the main constraint.

Some other techniques, like fractional open circuit volt-
age and short circuit current, are also famous, where step
size depends on panel ratings, such as open-circuit voltage
and short circuit current of the solar PV panel. However,
the ratings are not
the PV panel,
in the entire life of
constant. Therefore, these techniques are not reliable solu-
tions for maximum power point
tracking (MPPT). More-
over, some researchers have proposed, improved model-based
MPPT [10], current control loop-based MPPT [11], closed-
loop MPPT [12], discrete current sensing-based MPPT [13],
root-ﬁnding techniques-based MPPT, incremental resistance-
based MPPT, sliding mode MPPT, and MPPT based on
ripple correlation. However, improvements in solutions are not
remarkable and signiﬁcant because these techniques perform

2332-7782 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Adelaide. Downloaded on June 29,2024 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. 9, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

very well during a few irradiation patterns. While, during other
types of irradiation patterns, these techniques cannot ﬁnd the
optimal solution. After these, artiﬁcial intelligence techniques,
such as fuzzy logic [14], neural networks, etc., have been used
for MPPT [15]. However, fuzziﬁcation and training require
huge amounts of data, which creates computational burden
and complexity, so these techniques are not popular. Some
researchers have proposed soft computing-based techniques
for MPPT, such as particle swarm optimization (PSO) [16],
ﬁreﬂy optimization, differential evolution, whale optimization
with differential evolution (WODE) [17], harmony search,
etc. However, the problems with these techniques are the
same as artiﬁcial intelligence-based algorithms. For searching,
it requires a big population of searching agents, which creates
a huge computational burden and poor dynamic performance.
A substantial literature shows that after these techniques,
researchers have tried model predictive control (MPC) based
MPPT such as multi-sensor based MPC MPPT [18]. This
technique [18] is shown excellent performance in different
solar irradiance conditions. However, it
is based on three
sensors (two-voltage sensors and one-current sensor), which
is not an economical solution. Moreover, extremum-seeking-
based MPC MPPT [19] and modiﬁed MPC MPPT [20]
algorithms have been proposed. These techniques have needed
one sensor by using an output observer, such as extremum
seeking-based MPC MPPT [19] is based on a one-voltage
sensor, one-current sensor, and one-output current observer,
and modiﬁed MPC MPPT [20] is based on a one-voltage
sensor, one-current sensor, and one-output voltage observer.
However, designing an accurate observer according to the
system is the key challenge in these techniques. Somehow
these issues are tried to solve in [21], [22], and [23]. However,
it is limited to a resistive load. In the case of EV or battery
charging, charging current monitoring or battery management
system (BMS) requires for safe operation.

A. Motivation

The major problems with these all techniques are that all
techniques require two sensors, one voltage, and one current
sensor [24]. The limitations of this type of technique are that
it monitors only input terminal parameters, as well as the solar
voltage is less sensitive to the change in solar irradiance and
environmental temperature, which makes dynamic response
the cost and response time of voltage
slower. Moreover,
sensors are higher and poor than current sensors. Therefore,
researchers have concentrated on voltage-sensorless MPPT
techniques. The available literature reveals that the Cauchy
and Gaussian sine cosine optimization algorithm [25] and
MPC [21], [22], [23] based techniques have been used avail-
able for MPPT only by using the current sensor. However, the
major limitation of this technique is that it is only applicable
to batteries [25] and resistive loads [21], [22], [23]. These are
not applicable for EV with BMS support. Moreover, it is based
on population-based searching, which creates a huge compu-
tational burden. Therefore, it is not possible to implement on
a low-cost microprocessor [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31],
[32], [33], [34]. These issues motivate a generalized current
sensor-based MPPT algorithm. Therefore, a novel voltage
sensorless-based model predictive control (VSPC) scheme is

developed for SP-EV applications to operate with the partially
shaded conditions for EV charging applications, which have
continuous, quick, and better dynamic performers during MPH
from the solar PV panel.

II. VOLTAGE SENSOR-LESS PREDICTIVE CONTROL

The general principle of the MPH is based on the output
of one voltage and one current sensor, which decides the PV
power. However, the voltage is less sensitive to the change
in solar irradiance and environmental temperature. Moreover,
the cost and response time of voltage sensors are higher and
poor than current sensors. Therefore, for the elimination of
the voltage sensor, the model predictive control (MPC) is
used here, as well as it also reduces the ripples in output
power. Moreover, adaptive control is used here to improve
the system’s dynamic response.

A. Model Predictive Control

The working principle of MPC [26] is based on a pre-
diction of the future behavior of the system. It realizes on
a selected time horizon, in an arbitrary number of samples,
which is decided according to the complexity of the ﬁtness
function [27]. In order to minimize or maximize the ﬁtness
function, it predicts the future steps as well as tunes the
present control signal, which forces it to converge or reach
the convergence criteria. The future response is denoted as,
˜S(n + N), where N = 1.

The ﬁtness function (ff) is described as

ff = min( f (S(n), u(n), . . . , u(n + N − 1)))

(1)

where L is the time horizon, u(n) is the controller output.
The controller output is totally dependent on the switching
ON (ξ = 1)/OFF (ξ = 0) state.

In an optimization problem, at each sampling time, the
problem is solved by using sensed variables (S(n)), and it
predicts the future response ( ˜S(n + N)) by using MPC at
different switching states (ξ  [1: x]), where x is the total
number of states. After that, the predicted results are compared
with the reference response, and it generates an error. Then
the new objective is to minimize the error signal, which
helps fulﬁll the expected response. The objective function and
constraints are described as [26]
⎛

⎞

μ1

⎜
⎜
⎝







ξ∈[1:x]
(n + 1) − S∗
 ˜S

1
1

ξ∈[1:x]
(n + 1) − S∗
+μ2
(n + 1)
 ˜S

2
2

ξ∈[1:x]
(n + 1) − S∗
 ˜S
. . . . . + μI
I
I

(n + 1)









(n + 1)

ε = min

S(n) ≤ SLimit

⎟
⎟
⎠(2)

(3)

where μ is the weight factor or importance factor of each
objective. SLimit is the maximum value of the variable. The
ﬂowchart of the MPC is given in Fig. 1.

B. Voltage Sensorless Predictive Control

In VSPC, two current sensors are used, one close to the PV
panel, which senses the PV current, and one sensor close to
the load, which senses the load current. Here, by using these
two currents, MPC decides the PV voltage and predicts the
PV current for the next sampling time. It is described in two

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Adelaide. Downloaded on June 29,2024 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

