Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Applied Energy 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apenergy 

The economics of global green ammonia trade – “Shipping Australian wind 
and sunshine to Germany” 

Jonas Egerer , Veronika Grimm *, Kiana Niazmand , Philipp Runge 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universit¨at Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Chair of Economic Theory, Lange Gasse 20, 90403 Nürnberg, Germany   

H I G H L I G H T S  

• Optimization model for the integrated assessment of the green ammonia value chain. 
• Case study for ammonia trade between Australia and Germany in 2030. 
• Sensitivity analysis on ammonia prices for technical and economic parameters. 
• Cost comparison of conventional and green ammonia production.  

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Green ammonia 
Ammonia trade 
Optimization model 
Case study Australia to Germany 

This  paper  contributes  to  understanding  the  transformation  of  global  energy  trade  to  green  energy  carriers, 
focusing on green ammonia as the foreseeable first green hydrogen carrier. We provide a comprehensive over-
view  of  today’s  ammonia  trade  and  assess  scaling  options  for  the  trade  of  green  ammonia.  To  that  aim,  we 
develop an optimization model for the integrated assessment of the green ammonia value chain that covers all 
steps  from  green  ammonia  production  in  an  exporting  country,  up  to  delivery  to  a  harbor  in  an  importing 
country.  The  model  endogenously  chooses  among  different  technology  options  and  determines  cost  minimal 
operation. In a case study, we apply the model to the large-scale import of ammonia from Australia to Germany 
in a scenario for 2030. The results show that green ammonia can reach cost parity with gray ammonia even for 
moderate gas prices (but not necessarily with blue ammonia) if CO2  prices are high enough. We also provide a 
sensitivity analysis with respect to the interest rate and other key technical and economic parameters and show 
that cracking ammonia to provide pure hydrogen comes at a 45 % cost markup per MWh at the destination.   

1. Introduction 

To mitigate climate change effectively and timely, rapid decarbon-
ization  of  the  global  economies  is  required.  The  transformation  is 
already well advanced in the electricity sector of various industrialized 
countries,  where  competitive  renewable  energy  technologies  increas-
ingly  replace  coal-  and  gas-fired  power  plants.  Climate-neutral  elec-
tricity  will  now  be  used  directly  or  indirectly  –  via  hydrogen  and  its 
derivatives – to decarbonize all remaining sectors of the economy [46]. 
In this context, the production and transport of hydrogen and energy 
carriers  is  getting  increasing  attention,  as  they  have  the  potential  to 
replace fossil coal, oil, and gas as a global energy commodity. Global 
hydrogen  trade  allows  import-dependent  countries  with  limited  and 

mediocre potential for renewable energies, to replace fossil fuel imports 
by imports of sustainable hydrogen based energy carriers. In turn, export 
opportunities are opening up for many countries that have high poten-
tial for renewable energy [31,32]. 

Various  options  are  being  discussed  for  the  overseas  transport  of 
hydrogen,  among  them  the  transport  of  cryogenic  hydrogen,  liquid 
organic hydrogen carriers (LOHCs) or energy carriers like ammonia or 
methanol [44,52,31,51,53]. In the short term, the transport of ammonia 
is particularly attractive, since ammonia and its derivates are already 
traded worldwide and therefore existing infrastructure can be used [60]. 
Furthermore,  all  links  in  the  process  chain  of  large-scale  renewable 
ammonia  production  are  already  established  and  have  a  very  high 
technology readiness level [56]. Ammonia today is mainly used for the 

* Corresponding author. 

(P. Runge).  

E-mail  addresses:  jonas.egerer@fau.de  (J.  Egerer),  veronika.grimm@fau.de  (V.  Grimm),  kiana.niazmand@fau.de  (K.  Niazmand),  philipp.runge@fau.de 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2023.120662 
Received 10 August 2022; Received in revised form 9 December 2022; Accepted 6 January 2023   

AppliedEnergy334(2023)120662Availableonline28January20230306-2619/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).J. Egerer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

production  of  fertilizers  but  also for  other industrial  applications  like 
explosives and textiles [3]. It is currently produced from fossil energy 
sources, either upstream near gas or coal extraction sites or downstream 
from imported fossil energy sources [59]. Global annual ammonia pro-
duction of about 180 Mt in 2019 emitted about 0.45 Gt carbon dioxide 
(CO2).1  Existing production capacity, if plants are run until the end of 
their lifetime (20–50 years), would result in locked-in CO2 emissions of 
4.4 to 15.5 Gt CO2. Projections for net zero emission scenarios in 2050 
[34] see a 25 % increase of global ammonia demand for existing users 
and additional energy demand for maritime fuel and power generation 
in the range of twice the global ammonia demand of today. 

Ammonia  production  with  green  hydrogen  (electrolysis  with 
renewable  energy sources),  and  with  blue  hydrogen  (fossil  fuels  with 
carbon capture technologies) during a transition period, could allow for 
significant emissions reductions in a timely manner by satisfying pro-
jected increases in global demand and by replacing existing ammonia 
production [21,52,34]. While there are still plans for the expansion of 
fossil ammonia production in some regions, with related greenhouse gas 
emissions, projects of several megatons in annual capacity will use low- 
carbon  technologies  until  2030  and  mark  the  first  step  towards  the 
defossilization or decarbonisation of ammonia production [34,35,58]. 
High  fossil  fuel  prices  resulting  from  Russia’s  war  of  aggression  on 
Ukraine could accelerate this transition from fossil to green ammonia. 
During the transition to carbon neutrality, ammonia production is 
likely to shift, at least in part, to regions with the most favorable con-
ditions  for  renewable  electricity  generation,  which  would  lead  to  a 
redirection and possibly an increase in global ammonia trade [27]. This 
development  will  also  affect  the  production  and  trade  of  important 
ammonia  derivates,  such  as  urea  and  ammonium  nitrate  [34].  The 
transition  will  therefore  likely  require  investment  in  new  vessels  for 
ammonia transport, new infrastructure at ports for loading, unloading, 
and storage, as well as downstream integration into consumption cen-
ters  [38,18].  Incentivizing  these  investments  requires  an  appropriate 
regulatory framework that, among others, internalizes external costs of 
fossil  fuels,  reduces  climate-damaging  subsidies,  and  allows  for  the 
certification of CO2-reduced derivatives. 

This paper contributes to understanding the challenges and oppor-
tunities  that  arise  from  the  transformation  of  global  energy  trade  to 
green energy carriers. We focus on green ammonia production and long- 
distance transportation, which is likely to be of high relevance for early 
global green energy trade. We first describe the current global ammonia 
trade and outline which parts of the value chains could continue to be 
used in the context of the transition to green ammonia. We then develop 
a  comprehensive  techno-economic  model  for  green  ammonia  value 
chains,  which  can  be  applied  for  a  wide  range  of  technologies  and 
production  processes  that  could  become  relevant  for  global  ammonia 
trade. Based on input cost assumptions, the model provides assessments 
of  the  future  levelized  cost  of  green  ammonia  –  i.e.,  as  feedstock  for 
industry  or  for  direct  energy  usage  –  and  the  levelized  cost  after  an 
optional conversion back to hydrogen. In particular, the model endog-
enously  derives  optimal  investment  levels  and  operation  for  different 
technologies of renewable energy supply, hydrogen and nitrogen pro-
duction,  ammonia  synthesis,  storage,  transport,  and  (optional)  recon-
version of ammonia back to hydrogen. This holistic view along the entire 
value  chain  in  one  model  enables  us  to  analyze  explicitly  the  in-
terdependencies  between energy supply, the  various production  steps 
for ammonia, and transportation to the demand centers. Decisions on 
the selection of different technologies for power generation, hydrogen 
production,  heat  integration,  storage  units,  etc.,  and  their  optimal 
operation are endogenous in our model. 

We  apply  our  model  to  a  case  study  exploring  trade  of  green 
ammonia  from  Australia  to  Germany  and  analyze  the  results  with 

1  Global production figures vary by source. 173 Mt [58] and 182 Mt [35]: no 

public data per country). 

respect to various parameter uncertainties. The case study for Australia 
is  particularly  well  suited  because,  first,  the  continent  will  export 
increasing amounts of green energy due to its immense renewable en-
ergy potential and, second, its long distance from Germany allows us to 
assess the importance of transportation costs relative to the production 
costs of green ammonia. The results with different parameter sensitiv-
ities  for  2030  indicate  that  green  ammonia  is  on  the  way  to  become 
competitive  to  gray  ammonia  production  well  before  the  end  of  this 
decade. In addition to decreasing cost for green ammonia, this devel-
opment  could  accelerate  by  the  fact  that  the  price  for  ammonia  pro-
duction  from  fossil  fuels  is  likely  to  increase  due  to  higher  costs  for 
carbon  emissions  and  uncertainty  on  fuel  fossil  prices.  Thus,  green 
ammonia can contribute to timely decarbonization of the feedstock for 
several  industry sectors  and  become  a  green  energy  carrier  for direct 
energy applications or reconversion into hydrogen. Depending on the 
assumption  for  economic  and  technical  parameters,  the  technologies 
used and their operational management of an ammonia process chain 
differs  significantly.  Transportation  costs  account  for  only  a  small 
portion of the levelized cost of imported ammonia. However, ammonia 
loses some of  its cost advantage when  it has  to be converted back to 
hydrogen for specific applications. The energetic usage of ammonia will 
therefore likely depend on technological advances in its direct utiliza-
tion as maritime fuel and in power and heat generation plants. 

Recent literature provides a wide range of cost analyses for green and 
blue ammonia. Often simplified models are used, which can provide a 
good  approximation  but  do  not  allow  endogenous  decisions  about 
optimal technology choices. Possible synergies between different tech-
nologies are often not modeled and the dynamic operational manage-
ment  inherent  for  volatile  renewable  production  is  not  accurately 
represented. Several among the existing studies focus only on the pro-
duction  of  green  ammonia,  but  not  on  its  storage,  transport  or  usage 
[45,21,15]. Other studies go beyond this and look at the storage and 
transport of ammonia. For example, Hank et al. [31] estimates the cost 
of  production  and  long-distance  transport  of  green  ammonia  from 
Morocco to Germany in 2030. Similarly, Ishimoto et al. [38] conduct a 
case study to determine the levelized cost of supplying hydrogen to the 
European market based on the production of blue and green ammonia in 
Norway  and  subsequently  ammonia  transport  and  decomposition  to 
hydrogen. In contrast, Salmon and Ba˜nares-Alc´antara [52], Li et al. [39], 
Ik¨aheimo et al. [36], Del Pozo and Cloete [22], Fasihi et al. [27], Nayak- 
Luke  and  Ba˜nares-Alc´antara  [43]  present  dynamic  models  of  green 
ammonia production by fluctuating renewables. Salmon and Ba˜nares- 
Alc´antara [52] show economies of scale for green ammonia production 
and focus on land availability for large-scale ammonia production. Li 
et al. [39] compare different supply modes for energy from wind plants, 
for  ammonia  production  plants  in  China  including  onsite  production, 
supply via trucks transporting gaseous hydrogen, and energy transport 
via transmission lines. Ik¨aheimo et al. [36] also model the application of 
ammonia  and  compare  costs  for  ammonia-based  district  heating  in 
different northern European countries. Del Pozo and Cloete [22] focus 
on the production costs of various processes for the production of blue 
ammonia and set these in relation to the production of green ammonia. 
Fasihi et al. [27] and Nayak-Luke and Ba˜nares-Alc´antara [43] examine a 
large  number  of  possible  production  sites  for  green  ammonia,  with 
Fasihi et al. [27] also providing an overview of the transport costs of the 
derivative. 

In the above-mentioned publications, the authors make various ex- 
ante  decisions  about  technology  choices  and  apply  cost-optimized 
models with linear constraints to the configuration of green ammonia 
supply  chain  components  [27,43,52].  The  optimization  model  in  this 
paper relates to these studies and extends the literature with endogenous 
decisions on investment and operation for different technologies along 
the entire value chain of green ammonia. This includes seawater desa-
lination,  renewable  energy  supply,  electrolysis,  ammonia  synthesis, 
large-scale long-distance transport of green ammonia, and its possible 
application as hydrogen carrier by including later reconversion. 

AppliedEnergy334(2023)1206622