Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Chemical Engineering Journal 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cej 

Novel Pt-carbon core–shell decorated hierarchical CoMo2S4  as efficient 
electrocatalysts for alkaline/seawater hydrogen evolution reaction 

Subramanian Vijayapradeep a, Natarajan Logeshwaran a, Shanmugam Ramakrishnan a, b, 
Ae Rhan Kim a, Prabhakaran Sampath d, Do Hwan Kim a, c, Dong Jin Yoo a, e, * 
a Graduate School, Department of Energy Storage/Conversion Engineering (BK21 FOUR), Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Research Center, Jeonbuk National University, 567 
Baekje-daero, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do 54896, Republic of Korea 
b School of Engineering, Newcastle University, Merz Court, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE17RU, United Kingdom 
c Division of Science Education and Institute of Fusion Science, Jeonbuk National University, 567 Baekje-daero, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do 54896, Republic of 
Korea 
d Department of Nano Convergence Engineering, Jeonbuk National University, 567 Baekje-daero, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do 54896, Republic of Korea 
e Department of Life Science, Jeonbuk National University, 567 Baekje-daero, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do 54896, Republic of Korea   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Heterogeneous electrocatalyst 
Pt-C core–shell 
Hydrogen evolution reaction 
Density functional theory calculations 
Seawater electrolysis 

Electrochemical  water  electrolysis  is  a  prominent  method  of  green-hydrogen  fuel  production.  Tailored  nano-
structures of Pt-based electrocatalysts have high priority in hydrogen production. Herein, we fabricated carbon- 
encapsulated Pt core–shell supported CoMo2S4-NGNF as an efficient electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution 
reaction (HER). The novel carbon-encapsulated Pt core shells improved the long-term durability. The Pt@Co-
(cid:0) 2 in 1.0 M 
Mo2S4-NGNF hybrids displayed overpotentials of 27 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm
KOH  and  outstanding  durability  of  100  h.  When  Pt@CoMo2S4-NGNF‖IrO2  was  employed  in  overall  seawater 
(cid:0) 2 current density. Additionally, we evaluated 
electrolysis applications, it required 1.54 V to achieve a 10 mA cm
the electronic structure and HER mechanism of Pt@CoMo2S4 & CoMo2S4 using density functional theory (DFT) 
calculations.  This  work  illustrates  the  possibility  of  designing  an  effective,  long-lasting,  and  scalable  electro-
catalyst for the electrolysis of alkaline and seawater to produce pure hydrogen.   

1. Introduction 

Exponential increases in environmental pollution and rapid energy 
demand require alternative sustainable, clean energy resources to con-
trol carbon footprints [1–4]. Hydrogen is one of the best green energy 
reservoirs  in  transport  and  large  energy  applications  [5,6].  Water- 
splitting  catalysis  has  been  acknowledged  as  a  promising  potential 
technology to produce hydrogen in large quantities [7,8]. Water elec-
trolysis  involves  two  core  reactions:  the  oxygen  evolution  reaction 
(OER) at the cathode and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at the 
anode  [9,10].  Various  concerns  have  limited  heterogeneous  catalysis 
hydrogen  production,  such  as  sluggish  reaction  kinetics,  inadequate 
catalyst  optimization,  and  significant  energy  consumption  in  alkaline 
media [11,12]. Platinum (Pt)-based electrocatalysts have drawn a lot of 
interest  for  large-scale  affordable  pure  hydrogen  generation  because 
they  can  be  used  in  interface  engineering  and  active  crystalline  facet 

engineering  [13–17].  Still,  Pt  is  a  state-of-the-art  material  choice  in 
alkaline HER due to the preferred Pt-Had formations for proficient water 
dissociation.  Rational  structural  Pt-based  electrocatalysts  with  unique 
enhanced catalytic activity, excellent capacity, and longer stability are 
of special interest [18,19]. Long-term durability issues of Pt-based het-
erogeneous water electrolysis can be improved by the incorporation of 
chemical-resistant supports. Carbon matrices such as graphene, carbon 
nanofibers,  and  fullerenes  can  significantly  mitigate  Pt  nanoparticle 
agglomeration and improve electrical conductivity. Encapsulation of Pt 
nanoparticles using various carbon sources like melamine, aniline, and 
glucose has numerous advantages of oxidation tolerance, metal corro-
sion resistance, and electrical conductivity [20–23]. The thickness of the 
encapsulation  carbon  matrix  would  either  increase  or  decrease  the 
active Pt site exposure for enhanced electrical conductivity. Optimiza-
tion of carbon matrix thickness is essential in unique Pt-carbon encap-
sulation material construction [24]. 

* Corresponding  author  at:  Graduate  School,  Department  of  Energy  Storage/Conversion  Engineering  (BK21  FOUR),  Hydrogen  and  Fuel  Cell  Research  Center, 

Jeonbuk National University, 567 Baekje-daero, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do 54896, Republic of Korea. 

E-mail address: djyoo@jbnu.ac.kr (D. Jin Yoo).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2023.145348 
Received 26 February 2023; Received in revised form 9 July 2023; Accepted 8 August 2023   

ChemicalEngineeringJournal473(2023)145348Availableonline9August20231385-8947/©2023ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.S. Vijayapradeep et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

The combination of parallelly active Pt and earth-abundant transi-
tion metals has been proposed as an effective strategy in efficient het-
erogeneous  water  electrolysis  applications  [25,26].  As  recently 
reported,  Pt-supported  with  MoS2  [27],  CoO  [28],  MoC  [29], 
Ti0.7Mo0.3O2  [30],  and  CoS2  [31]  nanostructures  displayed  superior 
catalytic  activity  with  enhanced  durability.  Strong  metal–metal  in-
teractions  (SMMI)  [32]  and  interfacial/electronic  interactions  from 
combining Pt with transition metal alloys are of interest. Ternary tran-
sition  metal  sulfides  such  as  Mox-Sx-Mx  (M  = Co,  Ni,  and  Fe)  have 
excellent  capacity  and  electrocatalytic  activity  with  improved  redox 
properties than binary metal sulfides due to multiple oxidation states. 
Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) alone possesses comparable HER energy 
profiles (ΔGH*) and high theoretical exchange current density (j0) to Pt 
[33]. Hence, it has the promising ability of replacing Pt-based material, 
though limited intrinsic active sites and electrical conducting properties 
make its utility doubtful. Efforts such as defect engineering, structural 
optimization, and regulating metal composition have been made to in-
crease active site exposures. Cobalt (Co) elemental doping is a promising 
choice to provide additional active sites and enhance the overall HER 
performance  [34,35].  Co-Mo-S  doping  can  also  influence  the  charge 
carrier density in MoS2. The presence of Co dopants alters the balance 
between electrons and holes in the material, leading to a higher con-
centration  of  either  carriers  depending  on  the  specific  doping  condi-
tions.  This  modulation  of  carrier  density  can  further  enhance  the 
electrical conductivity of Co-Mo-S compared to undoped MoS2 [36,37]. 
Even  an  additional  carbon  matrix-assisted  Co-Mo-S  would  provide 
multiple advantages for practical HER applications [38]. 

Herein,  we  fabricated  carbon-encapsulated  Pt-carbon  core–shell 
deposited  on  self-supported  CoMo2S4  hierarchically  grown  N-doped 
graphene  nanofibers  (Pt-C@CoMo2S4-NGNF)  as  efficient  and  scalable 
electrocatalysts  for  HER  in  alkaline  and  seawater  media.  Initially, 
typical CoMo2S4  nanosheets were hierarchically grown on uniform N- 
doped conducting GNF using a facile hydrothermal technique. Then, Pt- 
carbon core shells were separately developed using a Pt-aniline complex 
in a simple thermal reduction method. Specific ratios of aniline complex 
and  Pt  ions  were  maintained  to  deliver  the  optimal  carbon  layer 
thickness-coated  shell  formation  on  Pt  nanoparticles.  Then,  typically 
prepared CoMo2S4-NGNF and Pt-aniline complexes were sintered under 
an inert environment. The obtained Pt-C@CoMo2S4-NGNF hybrid elec-
trocatalysts with ternary transition metal sulfides resulted in effective 
activities  of  Pt,  while  N-atoms  interacted  with  various  carbon  matrix 
supports.  This  can  facilitate  SMMI  and  electronic/interfacial  hetero-
junction interactions to help tune the adsorption activity and electron 
delocalization  capacity.  Due  to  the  previously  mentioned  physico-
chemical  features,  fabricated  Pt-C@CoMo2S4-NGNF  hybrids  showed 
overpotentials of 27 mV and 79 mV to obtain an HER current density of 
(cid:0) 2,  respectively,  in  1.0  M  KOH.  Promi-
10  mA  cm
nently, Pt-C@CoMo2S4-NGNF delivers high stability and retains ~ 95% 
operating current density after a 100 h durability test. We carried Pt- 
C@CoMo2S4-NGNF||IrO2  as  cathodic  and  anodic  electrodes  in  the 
overall water electrolysis system. The system required 1.52 V to obtain a 
(cid:0) 2  in 1.0 M KOH solution. This novel Pt- 
current density of 10 mA cm
C@CoMo2S4-NGNF hybrid significantly increased catalytic activity and 
long-term durability compared to Pt-C. Additionally, we evaluated HER 
activities  of  Pt-C@CoMo2S4-NGNF  in  an  alkaline  seawater  medium, 
which  displayed  an  overpotential  of  1.54  V  and  1.67  V  to  obtain 
(cid:0) 2. We also 
respective current densities of 10 mA cm
studied the adsorption energy profiles of Pt@CoMo2S4, CoMo2S4, and Pt 
using first-principle density functional theory calculations. As a proof of 
concept,  these  findings  demonstrate  the  unusual  HER  activity  of  Pt- 
C@CoMo2S4-NGNF hybrids in both alkaline and seawater conditions. 

(cid:0) 2  and  100  mA  cm

(cid:0) 2 and 200 mA cm

2. Experimental section 

2.1. Synthesis of CoMo2S4@NGNF 

Raw commercial GNFs powder was immersed in 13.0 M HNO3 for 48 
h  to  remove  the  metal  impurities,  which  were  then  filtered  out.  The 
resulting product was washed with deionized water (DI)/ethanol until it 
reached a neutral pH condition. A typical CoMo2S4@NGNF hierarchical 
structure  was  prepared  using  a  facile  hydrothermal  method.  Briefly, 
nitrogen-functionalized  graphene  nanofiber  (NGNF)  powder  was 
dispersed in 15 mL of deionized water and ultrasonicated for 2 h at room 
temperature.  Then,  0.1:0.2:0.4  mmol  ratio  of  Co(NO3)2⋅6H2O: 
Na2MoO4⋅2H2O: C2H5NS precursors was dissolved in 5 mL of DI water 
separately with mechanical stirring for 1 h. The above solutions were 
added dropwise to the GNF solution under controlled magnetic stirring 
conditions. Then, the final mixture was transferred into a 100 mL Teflon 
autoclave vessel and was maintained at a heating temperature of 200 ℃ 
for 12 h. The resulting product was washed several times with DI water 
and ethanol. The obtained product was then dried overnight at 60 ℃ in a 
vacuum oven. 

2.2. Synthesis of Pt-C@CoMo2S4-NGNF 

The  Pt-aniline  complex  was  prepared  by  placing  0.12  g  of 
H2PtCl6⋅6H2O  in  35  mL  of  aniline  with  stirring  for  6  h  at  room  tem-
perature.  Then,  the  mixture  was  filtered  using  0.2  M  HCl  in  a  rotary 
vacuum pump to remove the excess unreacted aniline and dry it in a 
vacuum oven at 60 ℃ to obtain the dark purple color of the Pt-aniline 
complex. Then, typically obtained CoMo2S4-NGNF and Pt-aniline com-
plex was dissolved in 50 mL of ethanol and stirred for 30 min. The rotary 
vacuum pump was employed to evaporate the ethanol solution. Finally, 
the resulting Pt-aniline complex-coated CoMo2S4-NGNF was sintered in 
a tubular furnace at 500 ℃ under an inert N2 atmosphere for 1 h. 

3. Results and discussion 

3.1. Morphological and structural investigations of CoMo2S4-NGNF/Pt- 
C@CoMo2S4-NGNF nanohybrids 

The  synthesis  procedures  of  CoMo2S4-NGNF  and  Pt-carbon  core–-
shell on CoMo2S4-NGNF are illustrated in Fig. 1. Pt-carbon nanoparticle 
encapsulation on the CoMo2S4@NGNF nanohybrids was achieved by a 
facile,  cost-effective,  single-step  in-situ  hydrothermal  and  calcination 
process. A strong bond between a metal–metal formation with carbon 
results in high synergistic interactions of CoMo precursors and graphene 
nanofiber (GNF). The ability of the carbon matrix to act as an electron 
mediator to transfer electrons from the catalyst surface to the H2  evo-
lution is a fascinating function of GNFs [39]. During the hydrothermal 
reaction, the generated H2S gas effectively converted metal oxides into 
their  corresponding  sulfides.  Also,  the  released  NH3  gas  effectively 
doped  nitrogen into  the  graphene  nanofiber skeleton  [40].  which  en-
sures the formation of flower-like CoMo2S4  on GNF during the hydro-
thermal reactions, In the subsequent thermal reduction process of Pt- 
carbon  core–shell  formation,  aniline  complexes  provide  nitrogen  for 
the carbon sources. During the inert (N2) environment graphitization, 
sintering process, carbon skeletons from aniline provide additional ni-
trogen supports on individual Pt particles as well as the CoMo2S4-NGNF 
surfaces.  This  intrinsic  synergy  of  N  atom  doping  can  influence  the 
durability,  capability  of  Pt-C@CoMo2S4-NGNF  (PC@CMS-NG)  nano-
hybrids and their HER performances. Morphological and structural in-
vestigations  of  prepared  electrocatalysts  were  evaluated  using  field 
emission  scanning  electron  microscopy  (FE-SEM)  and  high-resolution 
transmission  electron  microscopy  (HR-TEM).  Fig.  2a  represents  FE- 
SEM images of CoMo2S4-NGNF (CMS-NG) nanohybrids, which exhibit 
consistent growth of hierarchical CoMo2S4 nano petals on the skeleton of 
N-doped  carbon  nanofiber.  The  high-resolution  elemental  color 

ChemicalEngineeringJournal473(2023)1453482