1166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 29, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Optimal Prediction Intervals
of Wind Power Generation

Can Wan, Student Member, IEEE, Zhao Xu, Senior Member, IEEE, Pierre Pinson, Senior Member, IEEE,
Zhao Yang Dong, Senior Member, IEEE, and Kit Po Wong, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Accurate and reliable wind power forecasting is es-
sential to power system operation. Given signiﬁcant uncertainties
involved in wind generation, probabilistic interval forecasting
provides a unique solution to estimate and quantify the potential
impacts and risks facing system operation with wind penetration
beforehand. This paper proposes a novel hybrid intelligent algo-
rithm approach to directly formulate optimal prediction intervals
of wind power generation based on extreme learning machine and
particle swarm optimization. Prediction intervals with associated
conﬁdence levels are generated through direct optimization of
both the coverage probability and sharpness to ensure the quality.
The proposed method does not involve the statistical inference
or distribution assumption of forecasting errors needed in most
existing methods. Case studies using real wind farm data from
Australia have been conducted. Comparing with benchmarks
applied, experimental results demonstrate the high efﬁciency and
reliability of the developed approach. It is therefore convinced
that the proposed method provides a new generalized framework
for probabilistic wind power forecasting with high reliability and
ﬂexibility and has a high potential of practical applications in
power systems.

Index Terms—Extreme learning machine, forecasts, particle

swarm optimization, prediction intervals, wind power.

I. INTRODUCTION

W IND energy is the most important and efﬁcient renew-

able energy and is widely utilized for power generation
in modern power systems in the past decades. In particular, wind
power can supply up to 20% of annual electricity consumption

Manuscript received March 27, 2013; revised July 13, 2013 and September
23, 2013; accepted October 23, 2013. Date of publication November 12, 2013;
date of current version April 16, 2014. This work was supported in part by Hong
Kong RGC GRF grants no.515110, 528412, and T23-407/13-N. The work of
C. Wan was supported by a Hong Kong Ph.D. Fellowship. Paper no. TPWRS-
00371-2013.

C. Wan is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong, and also with Centre for Elec-
tric Power and Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby,
Denmark (e-mail: can.wan@connect.polyu.hk).

Z. Xu is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, The Hong Kong Poly-
technic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong, and also with the University of
Newcastle, Callaghan NSW 2308, Australia (e-mail: eezhaoxu@polyu.edu.hk).
P. Pinson is with the Centre for Electric Power and Energy, Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark (e-mail: ppin@elektro.dtu.dk).
Z. Y. Dong is with the School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The

University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia (e-mail: zydong@ieee.org).

K. P. Wong is with the School of Electrical, Electronic and Computer En-
gineering, The University of Western Australia, WA 6009, Australia (e-mail:
kitpo@ieee.org).

Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online

at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPWRS.2013.2288100

in Denmark. However, wind power also introduces much more
uncertainties than conventional generation due to the chaotic na-
ture of the weather system. Accurate and reliable wind power
forecasting becomes highly meaningful to optimize the oper-
ation cost and improve the reliability for power systems with
increased wind penetration [1].

In the past, most researches focused on point forecasting ap-
proaches for wind power [2]. Due to the nonstationarity of wind
power series, traditional point forecasting can hardly be accu-
rate, and the forecasting errors are unavoidable and signiﬁcant
to some extent. For traditional applications, wind power fore-
casting errors are statistically analyzed in [3]. With the integra-
tion of high penetration of wind generation in deregulated power
systems, the development of probabilistic forecasting tools is
needed for making decisions in the operational domain to ac-
counting for wind generation uncertainties. Recently, different
approaches have been proposed for probabilistic wind power
forecasts to obtain prediction intervals (PIs). Meteorological
ensembles are used to obtain predictive distribution and esti-
mate the uncertainty of forecasts [4], [5]. The uncertainty of
wind power forecasting is investigated based on the nonlinear
power curve and statistical analysis of wind speed prediction
errors [6]. Quantile regression is used to estimate different fore-
casting quantiles [7], [8]. Based on the point prediction results
of AWPPS, WPPT and Sipreólico, PIs are constructed through a
combined nonparametric probability forecasts and adaptive re-
sampling approach [9]. In [10], radial basis function has been
implemented to derive quantile forecasts of wind power based
on point prediction results, weather conditions, etc. The con-
ditional kernel density (CKD) estimation approach is proposed
to estimate of the probability distribution of wind power gen-
eration [11]. In general, PIs with associated conﬁdence levels
successfully quantify the uncertainties of wind power forecasts,
which essentially beneﬁt all participants in power systems to
prepare for possible scenarios in advance and signiﬁcantly re-
duce risks facing power system operation and control, such as
wind farm control, reserve setting, energy storage sizing, unit
commitment, wind power trading, and so forth [12]–[17].

In this paper, a hybrid intelligent algorithm (HIA) based in-
terval forecasting approach is newly developed to produce pre-
diction intervals of wind power generation based on the ex-
treme learning machine (ELM) [18] and particle swarm opti-
mization (PSO) [19]. The proposed HIA method aims to ob-
tain optimal PIs without the prior knowledge, statistical infer-
ence or distribution assumption of forecasting errors required
in most traditional approaches. ELM applied in the proposed
approach is a novel learning algorithm proposed for training

0885-8950 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Adelaide. Downloaded on June 29,2024 at 09:24:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

WAN et al.: OPTIMAL PREDICTION INTERVALS OF WIND POWER GENERATION

1167

single-hidden layer feedforward neural networks (SLFNs) fea-
turing extremely fast learning speed and superior generaliza-
tion capability. ELM successfully avoids the limitations of tradi-
tional neural networks (NNs) learning algorithms, such as local
minima, overtraining, high computation costs and so forth. Due
to its excellent performance, ELM has been used in many dif-
ferent applications including both regression and classiﬁcation
tasks [20]–[22].

Classical NNs based PIs construction methods always as-
sume that prediction errors are normally distributed [23]–[26].
These methods are not applicable to the case of ELM, since the
extreme learning process is very different from that for con-
ventional NNs. Lower upper bound estimation (LUBE) method
is proposed for PI construction based on traditional NN [27],
applied in load forecasting [28] and wind power forecasting
[29]. However, traditional NNs employed in the LUBE method
would cause several inevitable limitations, such as overtraining,
high computation burden, and so forth. Furthermore, the cov-
erage width-based criterion (CWC) cannot accurately measure
the overall skill of constructed PIs. Traditional PIs construc-
tion methods for wind power rely on quantile analysis of point
forecast errors with or without prior distribution assumptions
[4]–[11], where the procedures of PIs formulation and ﬁnal per-
formance assessment are usually separated. E.g. in [9], PIs can
be achieved through a conditional probabilistic modeling be-
tween point forecast outputs and associated errors. In contrast,
the proposed HIA approach integrates the two procedures holis-
tically to formulate the PIs directly to pursue the best quality of
resultant PIs, without the need of prior knowledge and distribu-
tion assumption of point forecasts errors. As investigated in [30]
as early as 1970s, with a properly constructed cost function, PI
estimation could be considered as a Bayesian decision-making
procedure to acquire an optimal PI that minimizes the expected
cost. The objective function of HIA is specially formulated to
address both the coverage probability and sharpness of PIs si-
multaneously, and is optimized through PSO featuring fast con-
vergence and gradient-free optimization. Furthermore, the pro-
posed method is able to generate multiple optimal PIs of dif-
ferent conﬁdence levels in one single optimization process.

Generally, different decision-makers in power systems have
different look-ahead time preferences ranging from minutes to
days for wind power forecasts according to their own opera-
tional requirements. Very short-term wind power prediction is
needed to wind farm control [12], [13], the temporal operation
of wind storage systems associated with temporal market
regulations such as Australian National Electricity Market with
5-min resolution [31], and the transmission system operator
(TSO) which aims to optimally dispatch reserves for the con-
tinuous balance of the power system [32], [33]. Hourly ahead
forecast is crucial for power system and electricity market
balance, e.g., Nord pool market [34]. Longer term forecasts
up to days ahead are very meaningful for unit commitment
[16], day-ahead market trading [17], etc. The proposed HIA
method has been tested using the practical data of two wind
farms in Australia. Without loss of generality, in the case study
we focus on the hourly forecast on an hourly basis though with
extendibility. Comparing with benchmarks, the effectiveness of

the proposed method has been proved through comprehensive
evaluations with respect to both the reliability and overall skill
of the forecasting results. By accurate quantiﬁcation of the un-
certainties of wind generation forecasts, the proposed interval
forecasting approach has a high potential to support various
operation and planning activities in power systems, such as to
provide reliable information for dispatching, e.g., the hourly
Nord pool market. Particularly, the interval forecasting results
can also be used to develop new operation and planning tools
for TSO to probabilistically determine the needed reserves in
advance [14], [15], and to facilitate Gencos’ risk management
through strategic biding [17].

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II in-
troduces the ELM and PIs formulation. Section III describes PIs
evaluation indices including reliability and sharpness. Objective
function modeling and the detailed procedures of the proposed
HIA approach are expressed in Section IV. Comprehensive nu-
merical studies are implemented and analyzed in Section V. Fi-
nally, the conclusion is drawn in Section VI.

II. PREDICTION INTERVAL FORMULATION

A. Extreme Learning Machine

ELM is a recently developed novel algorithm for training
a single hidden-layer feedforward neural network [18]. Dif-
ferent from traditional gradient-based training algorithms in
supervised batch learning, ELM randomly chooses the input
weights and hidden biases and needs not be tuned in the training
process, dramatically saving learning time. Given datasets with
where the inputs
hidden

arbitrary distinct samples
and the targets
neurons and activation function
samples with zero error, it can be expressed by the following
equation:

can approximate the

, if the ELM with

where
connecting the

represents the weight vector
th hidden neuron and the input neurons,
denotes the weight vector connecting
denotes the
is the
.

the th hidden neuron and the output neurons,
threshold of the th hidden neuron, and
output of the th hidden neuron with respect to the input
Equation (1) can be simpliﬁed as

where
expressed as

is the hidden layer output matrix of the modeled ELM,

...

...

(1)

(2)

(3)

The

th column of

the

th hidden neuron with respect

denotes the output vector of
to the inputs

. In addition,

is the matrix of output

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Adelaide. Downloaded on June 29,2024 at 09:24:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

