Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Energy Conversion and Management 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/enconman 

Design and investigation of PV string/central architecture for bayesian 
fusion technique using grey wolf optimization and flower pollination 
optimized algorithm 

Hemalatha S a,*, Johny Renoald A b, Banu G c, Indirajith K d 
a Department of EEE, St. Joseph’s Institute of Technology, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India 
b Department of EEE, Erode Sengunthar Engineering College, Perundurai, Tamilnadu, India 
c Department of EEE, VSB College of Engineering Technical Campus, Coimbatore, Tamilnadu, India 
d Department of EEE, Erode Sengunthar Engineering College, Perundurai, Tamilnadu, India   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Grey Wolf Optimization algorithm 
Flower Pollination Algorithm 
Partially Shading Condition 
Bayesian Fusion Technique Maximum Power 
Point 
Photovoltaic array 

One of the most essential factors in the current study is effectively harvesting the Maximum Power Extraction 
(MPE)  from  the  Photovoltaic  (PV)  panel.  The  primary  difficulties  in  extracting  solar  power  is  occurrence  of 
partial shading which causes the panel to significantly increases power loss. These will mainly occur due to when 
partially  shaded  solar  PV  array  kept  under  certain  critical  conditions  for  obtaining  maximum  output  power. 
Many researcher have suggested by connecting bypass diodes in anti-parallel to the PV modules hotspots in the 
modules  can  be  avoided.  Out  of  all  techniques,  the  proposed  Bayesian  Fusion  Technique  (BFT)  is  a  hybrid 
optimization  algorithm  that  combines  the  Grey  Wolf  Optimization  (GWO)  and  Flower  Pollination  Algorithm 
(FPA) techniques to optimize the performance of solar panels in photovoltaic (PV) systems. The combination of 
GWO and FPA forms an ideal combination that is beneficial for optimizing the performance of PV systems is 
determined  in  this  work.  In  this  study  real  6*6  PV  array  string  and  irregular  PV  array  configuration  such  as 
central and parallel-series PV string combination of various partial shading pattern is compared and found to be 
effective for reducing the hotspots problems. The performance of these configuration under different shading 
patterns  have  been  compared and  analyzed  with  the  different  parameters  like output  power,  conversion  effi-
ciency and tracking efficiency. This article state about the influence of partial darkening and the crucial point 
that  reduce  the  sensitivity  to  shading  heaviness.  For  better  understanding  for  reader  the  MATLAB/Simulink 
software is used to validate the simulation result with real time data. Overall, this article states the BFT is an 
efficient and reliable approach to improve the efficiency of PV systems, by combining two optimization tech-
niques like GWO and FPA hybrid algorithm. This article gives clear insight to the researchers for choosing BFT- 
GWO algorithm in order to decrease the cost and wastage of energy for achieving better solar panel performance.   

1. Introduction 

Nowadays, electricity requirement for domestic and industry keep on 
increasing day by day. Conventional energy sources have the following 
disadvantages like exhaustible, overpriced, and also pass off smoke and 

slag. In [1-6], non-conventional energy resources including fuel cells, 
wind, solar, and biogas are optimal for replacing conventional energy 
sources. Compared to other renewable power, the solar energy has more 
advantages. It produces no pollution, it needs minimal maintenance, no 
cost for fuel. It is easily available in the environment. Among all note-
worthy  facts  solar  panel  affect  by  external  factors  such  as  Lighting, 

Abbreviations: MPE, Maximum Power Extraction; PV, Photovoltaic; BFT, Bayesian Fusion Technique; GWO, Grey Wolf Optimization; FPA, Flower Pollination 
Algorithm; MP, Maximum power; FL, Fuzzy logic; ANN, artificial neural networks; SI, Swarm Intelligence; GBAS, Grouped Beetle Antennae Search; GA, Genetic 
Algorithm; MPPT, Maximum Power Point Tracking; PSC, Partial shading conditions; BFT-MPP, Bayesian Fusion Technique Proposal Maximum Power; V-I, Voltage to 
current; TCTPV, Total-Cross Tied PV; P-V, Power-Voltage; S-PV, Solar photovoltaic; PMW, Pulse with modulation; D, Diode; A, Amps; V-P, Voltage to power; IGBT, 
Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor; CTP, Conditional probability table; MPP, Maximum Power Point; GMPP, Global maximum power point; BFOT, Bayesian Fusion 
Optimization Technique; Ploss IGBT, Power losses in Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor; Plossinductor, Power losses in inductor. 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: hodeeelabaffairs@stjosephstechnology.ac.in (H. S).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2023.117078 
Received 7 January 2023; Received in revised form 15 April 2023; Accepted 17 April 2023   

EnergyConversionandManagement286(2023)117078Availableonline26April20230196-8904/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.H. S et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Nomenclature 

List of Symbol 
Symbols Meaning 
W/m2 
Radian meter square 
DC-DC  Direct current to direct current 
DC 
IMPP 
T 
I 
V 
η 
IPV 
VPV 
V0 
I0 
L 
D 
Cin 
A 
V 
Vin 
Vout 
Ploss 
Ic 
IRMS 
VCE 
FSW 
Ron 
2 
IC
Qg 
Coes 
IRMSDIODE Root mean square current diode 
Ploss diode Power loss diode 
VF 

Direct current 
Maximum power point current 
Time in seconds 
Current in amps 
Voltage in volts 
Efficiency 
Photovoltaic current 
Photovoltaic voltage 
Output Voltage 
Output current 
Inductor 
Diode 
Input capacitor 
Ammeter 
Voltmeter 
Input voltage 
Output voltage 
Power loss 
Collector current 
Root mean square current 
Collector to emitter voltage 
Switching frequency 
Resistance ON condition 
Collector current 
Total is total gate charge 
Output capacitance co-efficient 

Forward voltage 

Power factor 
pF 
Gate emitter voltage 
VGE 
Fall time 
tfall 
Rfall 
Raise time 
Watts 
W 
KHz 
kilohertz 
W/m2  Watt meter square 
Voc 
Vsc 
α 
β 
δ 
D 
Pmax 
Pin 
Gbest 
TS 
Ω 
◦
C 
t 
Isc 
Ioc 
Imp 
PPV 
P0 
ns 
nv 
RDC 
Γ(λ)
XK 
Xαk
i 
G 
L 
N 

Open circuit voltage 
Short circuit voltage 
Alpha 
Beta 
Delta 
Duty cycle 
Maximum power 
Input power 
Global best 
Sampling period 
Ohm 
Celsius 
Time 
Short circuit current 
Open circuit current 
Current at maximum power 
Photovoltaic power 
Output power 
Nano seconds 
Nano voltage 
Resistance in direct current 
Gamma function 
Iteration candidate position(k) 
, Xδk Wolves position in iteration (k) 

Current best solution 
Global best solution 
Strength of the pollination 
Group of flowers  

, Xβk

temperature,  and  dust  are  inevitable.  Therefore,  the  entire  research 
world is trying to figure this out, traditional system more concern about 
longevity. Impairment of this device are mainly affect by panel design, 
which determine how much electricity a PV panel can produce. When 
there  are  shading  circumstances,  among  the  section  of  the  different 
panels  affected  by  trees,  castles,  dust  and  high  –  rise  buildings  to 
complicate produce good efficiency.As a result, the panel generates the 
minimum output power as well as more peak power [7]. Hence under 
partial  shading  condition  the  extraction  of  maximum  power  (MP)  is 
complicated from the solar panel. 

To extract maximum power form Solar-PV (S-PV) under uniform and 
PSC  (Partial  shading  conditions)  and  an  optimization  technique  is 
necessary.  Various  optimization  techniques  have  been  created  and 
tested throughout the years, based on convergence time and equipment 
implementation. Perturb and Observe (P&O) and Incremental Conduc-
tance  are  the  most  often  used  traditional  approaches  [7].  However, 
many  techniques  are  user-friendly  of  straightforward  design.  When 
there is a panel under PSC, it can be unable to locate the exact global 
peak  output  and  local  peak  output.  The  performance  of  the  pumping 
system is improved by combining Fuzzy Logic (FL) with artificial neural 
networks (ANN)  [8]. According  to the literature,  this may not be the 
circumstance  for  many  researchers  used  traditional  MPP  techniques 
such Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) and Fuzzy Logic Control (FLC) to 
solve extraction problems in PV panels, which is required fuzzification, 
rule basis, and defuzzification processes. Following that, more number 
of  Swarm  Intelligence  (SI)  approaches  are  described  and  established. 
PSO was utilized as an optimization strategy in various solar irradiance 

conditions [9], but the resulting outcome as longer convergence rate, 
computational  speed/time  were  observed  [10]  and  also  poor  local 
search capabilities are observed due to the lack of crossover and muta-
tion  process.  Renewable  energy  is  being  encouraged  all  around  the 
world due to the pollution generated by fossil fuels. Solar energy is one 
of the most important of these energy sources. Since, it is cheap and does 
not pollute the environment. The major advantage of solar photovoltaic 
(PV)  technology,  which  is  immediately  turns  sunlight  into  the  power 
without any disturbance. As per the result of input source, it is strongly 
recommended and compared to other renewable energy sources. 

The proposed BFT combines the advantages of GWO and FPA and 
uses Bayesian theories to optimize their combination. The BFT approach 
creates a new search space and then adjusts the parameters of GWO and 
FPA to obtain the best optimization results for any given problem. When 
a specific critical point is reached, hotspot arises. Among all notable fact, 
this phenomenon occurs due to increases in temperature at shaded part 
of PV module during the reverse bias condition.  Bayesian Fusion is a 
technique  used  to  combine  probabilistic  models  of  different  types  of 
sensor  data  to  provide  a  more  comprehensive  view  of  a  particular 
environment. This technique is particularly useful in the field of solar 
panel  design,  as  it  allows  for  the  combination  of  surveys  of  potential 
locations  for  panels  with  satellite  imaging  to  better  assess  the  most 
effective and efficient locations to install solar panels. 

In the simulated annealing and the (FPA) Flower Pollination Algo-
rithm  are  combined  to  enhance  the  PV  tracking  optimization  perfor-
mance for improving the convergence rate. But, the FPA and Grey Wolf 
Optimization (GWO) methods are used only for core architecture [11]. 

EnergyConversionandManagement286(2023)1170782