Energy Conversion and Management 128 (2016) 178–190

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Energy Conversion and Management

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / e n c o n m a n

Feasibility study of an islanded microgrid in rural area consisting of PV,
wind, biomass and battery energy storage system
Shakti Singh a,⇑

, Mukesh Singh a, Subhash Chandra Kaushik b

a Department of Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering, Thapar University, Patiala, India
b Centre for Energy Studies, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 23 June 2016
Received in revised form 14 September
2016
Accepted 15 September 2016
Available online 28 September 2016

Keywords:
Artiﬁcial bee colony algorithm
Battery energy storage system
Biomass energy
Optimization
Solar energy
Wind energy

Renewable energy systems are proving to be promising and environment friendly sources of electricity
generation, particularly, in countries with inadequate fossil fuel resources. In recent years, wind, solar
photovoltaic (PV) and biomass based systems have been drawing more attention to provide electricity
to isolated or energy deﬁcient regions. This paper presents a hybrid PV-wind generation system along
with biomass and storage to fulﬁll the electrical load demand of a small area. For optimal sizing of com-
ponents, a recently introduced swarm based artiﬁcial bee colony (ABC) algorithm is applied. To verify the
strength of the proposed technique, the results are compared with the results obtained from the standard
software tool, hybrid optimization model for electric renewable (HOMER) and particle swarm optimiza-
tion (PSO) algorithm. It has been veriﬁed from the results that the ABC algorithm has good convergence
property and ability to provide good quality results. Further, for critical case such as the failure of any
source, the behavior of the proposed system has been observed. It is evident from the results that the
proposed scheme is able to manage a smooth power ﬂow with the same optimal conﬁguration.

(cid:1) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

In the last few years, renewable based hybrid energy system has
found attention due to increasing environmental concerns, energy
demand, fuel prices and depletion of fossil fuels. In particular, solar
and wind based generation systems have become sustainable and
environmentally friendly options to supply power in isolated or off
grid locations [1]. Solar photovoltaic (PV) energy conversion sys-
tems along with storage system have proved to be a very attractive
method to provide electricity to the places like remote or off grid
locations [2], residential households [3], off-grid location [4] and
commercial buildings [5,6]. However, PV generation has a low
energy conversion efﬁciency and cost of electricity per kWh is high.
This led to a substantial growth in wind based power generation.
Numerous researches focus on feasibility and optimum sizing of
the wind based systems [7–9]. However, the major drawbacks
for both wind and solar energy sources are their stochastic nature
which raises concern about the reliability of power to the user.
Therefore, to enhance the reliability, hybridization of both wind
and solar energy is a suitable alternative. One’s weakness can be

⇑ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: shakti.singh@thapar.edu (S. Singh), mukesh.singh@thapar.edu

(M. Singh), kaushik@ces.iitd.ernet.in (S.C. Kaushik).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2016.09.046
0196-8904/(cid:1) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

compensated by the strengths of another. However, it increases
the complexity of the system [10]. Stand alone solar-wind based
hybrid energy systems have been analyzed in various researches
in terms of cost effectiveness [11–13].

The biggest drawback of a stand alone solar-wind based energy
system is its dependency on power back-up due to the irregular
nature of both wind and solar resources. In case of a stand-alone
hybrid system generally back-up is provided by diesel generator
or energy storage devices such as batteries or ultra-capacitors.
Usage of a diesel generator in hybrid system raises cost and envi-
ronmental concerns. Fortunately, continuous advancement in
technology, other renewable options such as biomass, bio-gas,
mini hydro and fuel cell have been integrated along with solar
and wind sources [14]. In the aforementioned renewable energy
options, biomass seems to be a more viable option, especially in
the case of agriculture rich countries. Biomass can be converted
into many forms such as heat, electricity and bio-fuels [15]. Due
to advancement in biomass gasiﬁcation technology, electricity
generated by biomass gasiﬁers is becoming popular especially in
the rural areas. Biomass power generation plants have high load
factor and cost effective [16]. Biomass power generation has been
integrated along with PV, wind and other renewable energy
sources. Stand alone and grid connected PV-biomass with or with-
out storage is seen as a viable and cost effective option for electric-
ity, particularly in developing countries [17,18].

S. Singh et al. / Energy Conversion and Management 128 (2016) 178–190

179

Thus, utilizing locally available renewable energy sources for
generation of electricity can be a possible option at off grid or elec-
tricity deﬁcient places. In case of rural areas enough biomass, wind
and solar resources are available. Therefore, electricity demands of
such areas can be met by intelligently harnessing these resources.
Moreover, in the case of renewable hybrid energy system, the
power generated needs to be stored in a large battery bank [19].
A typical self-sustainable hybrid energy system could be designed
by incorporating renewable energy sources and storage systems. In
case of such hybrid systems, various factors such as total cost of
system, size and capacity of renewable energy sources plays a cru-
cial role. Optimal power ﬂow between different components of a
hybrid system is required due to the intermittent nature of renew-
able energy sources. Two major parameters such as price of gener-
ating energy and reliability of the system are major challenges in
hybrid systems. An optimal designed system should have the best
selection of components while assuring the reliability of the sys-
tem [20].

In the existing literature, limited work has been found in PV,
wind and biomass based hybrid systems with energy storage. For
instance, Balamurgun et al. [21] proposed a PV-biomass-wind
hybrid system for rural areas of India. The authors performed eco-
nomic analysis and component selection with the help of the stan-
dard software tool hybrid optimization model
for electric
renewable (HOMER). Rehman et al. [22] proposed a PV-biomass-
wind based hybrid system for a location in Bangladesh. The system
sizing was obtained with the help of HOMER. Dhass and Harikrish-
nan [23] evaluated a PV-wind-biomass hybrid system for rural
electriﬁcation on the basis of life cycle cost. Ho et al. [24] inte-
grated solar and biomass resources to make a small village self sus-
linear
tainable. To design hybrid system a mixed integer
programming based model has been developed. Garrido et al.
[25] presented techno-economic analysis of hybrid PV-biomass
energy system for an off grid location in Mozambique using tool
HOMER. It is inferred from the results that agricultural and food
processing wastes could play an important role in energy genera-
tion, particularly in rural areas.

The aforementioned literature reveals that researchers have
used either software tools or conventional optimization methods
for performance analysis. However, software tools possess some
serious disadvantages such as black box coding, single function
minimization and require more computational time as compared
to existing optimization techniques. However, many works have
been identiﬁed in hybrid systems where the different researchers
have proposed different conventional and evolutionary algorithms
to achieve the optimal size of the components used in hybrid sys-
tems. Different research activities have been carried out using con-
ventional techniques such as graphical construction method [26],
iterative method [27], trade off method [29] and linear program-
ming [28]. The problem with conventional techniques is that they
often trap in local minima. To overcome these shortcoming numer-
ous meta-heuristic evolutionary algorithms, i.e., genetic algorithm
[30], particle swarm optimization [31], ant and bee colony algo-
rithm [18], harmony search [32], bio-geography based optimiza-
tion [33], etc. have been implemented in different hybrid
systems. In recent years, a new trend has been observed where
researchers are applying widely these evolutionary algorithms
for optimal sizing of the hybrid energy system. To the best of
authors knowledge, a very limited work is found, where the opti-
mization of hybrid PV-wind-biomass along with the energy storage
system has been explored.

From the above mentioned literature, it has been observed that
there is a need of a hybrid system which consists of PV, wind and
biomass along with an energy storage system especially in isolated
or off-grid locations. The sizing of each equipment in any hybrid
system is a challenging work. Despite of works in literature under

different perspectives, the proposed work focuses on the hybrid
energy system which is a combination of PV, wind, biomass and
energy storage. The optimal sizing of components for all the above
hybrid systems have been identiﬁed by using either software tools
or by conventional and evolutionary algorithms. But none of the
researchers have worked on the optimal sizing of PV-wind-
biomass with battery bank as storage using evolutionary algo-
rithms. The biomass resources can be harnessed along with wind
and solar sources to enhance the reliability of the hybrid system.
Therefore, in this paper, an autonomous hybrid PV-wind-biomass
with battery system is proposed to fulﬁll the electrical demand
of a typical village. A swarm based meta-heuristic, artiﬁcial bee
colony (ABC) algorithm has been applied to realize optimal conﬁg-
urations of the proposed system. The major factor which differen-
tiates ABC algorithm from other algorithms (such as GA and PSO) is
that it employs a lesser number of control parameters. Also, it has a
good convergence accuracy and potential to provide optimal
results, like other evolutionary algorithms [34]. To compare the
performance of the applied technique, the results achieved by
the ABC algorithm have been compared with PSO and HOMER. A
brief comparison is performed on the basis of the levelized cost
of energy (LCOE). The conﬁguration with least LCOE is considered
the optimal one. The main objectives of this work are outlined as
follows.

(cid:1) To develop a mathematical model of an autonomous PV-wind-
biomass energy system with battery bank to provide electricity
for an off-grid location.

(cid:1) To deduce the optimal size of the components used in the pro-
posed system with the least LCOE by minimizing the net pre-
sent cost (NPC) of the system by applying swarm based ABC
algorithm.

(cid:1) To compare results achieved from the ABC algorithm to results

obtained with HOMER and PSO.

(cid:1) To observe the performance of the hybrid system in the critical

cases such as failure of any generating unit.

The major contribution of this paper is to design a cost effective
and reliable hybrid PV-wind-biomass energy system with battery
storage to meet the electrical load demand of small area which
has enough natural resources. The mathematical modeling of var-
ious components and operational strategy in the proposed system
have been discussed in detail. The detail cost analysis of the pro-
posed hybrid system is performed by applying two evolutionary
algorithms and one software tool. For optimal sizing and schedul-
ing, results obtained by applying these different methods have
been compared. Moreover, a critical case such as failure of one gen-
erating unit has also been performed to test the reliability of the
hybrid energy system.

2. Mathematical modeling of proposed hybrid system

This work emphasizes on the formulation of a new hybrid sys-
tem to supply the reliable power to off-grid or isolated location.
Fig. 1 shows the different components of the proposed microgrid.
The power generated by wind, solar and biomass is managed with
the help of storage devices. As shown in Fig. 1, load, wind turbines
and biomass gasiﬁer are connected to AC bus. Moreover, solar PV
panels and batteries are connected to the AC bus via converters.
A charge controller is also deployed to maintain the smooth ﬂow
of power and limit the charging and discharging rate of batteries.
The proposed system is most suitable for off grid locations and
agriculture based villages in developing countries where energy
crisis is a major concern. However, the proposed system can be
integrated to the grid. This system will be helpful in reducing

