i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 4 8 ( 2 0 2 3 ) 9 1 3 9 e9 1 5 4

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / h e

Estimating global production and supply costs for
green hydrogen and hydrogen-based green energy
commodities

Michael Moritz a,*
, Max Sch€onﬁsch a, Simon Schulte b
a Institute of Energy Economics at the University of Cologne (EWI), Vogelsanger Str. 321a, 50827 Cologne, Germany
b Oxford Institute for Energy Studies (OIES), 57 Woodstock Road, Oxford, OX2 6FA, United Kingdom

h i g h l i g h t s

(cid:1) Comprehensive database for global production and supply costs with projections until 2050.
(cid:1) Production costs are the signiﬁcant cost component for liquid or easily liqueﬁable energy commodities.
(cid:1) Green hydrogen might be traded regionally via pipeline rather than shipped globally via LH2.
(cid:1) Importing green ammonia is more cost-efﬁcient than importing green hydrogen for domestic ammonia production in Germany.
(cid:1) Germany: Only if a low-cost European H2 pipeline grid exists could ammonia production from imported H2 be cost-effective.

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Available online 27 December 2022

countries. Moreover, we evaluate total supply costs to Germany, considering both pipeline-

Article history:

Received 6 July 2022

Received in revised form

28 November 2022

Accepted 4 December 2022

Keywords:

Green hydrogen

Green ammonia

Hydrogen derivates

Techno-economic analysis

Production cost

Transport cost

Green energy commodities are expected to be central in decarbonising the global energy

system. Such green energy commodities could be hydrogen or other hydrogen-based en-

ergy commodities produced from renewable energy sources (RES) such as solar or wind

energy. We quantify the production cost and potentials of hydrogen and hydrogen-based

energy commodities ammonia, methane, methanol, gasoline, diesel and kerosene in 113

based and maritime transport. We determine production costs by optimising the invest-

ment and operation of commodity production from dedicated RES based on country-level

RES potentials and country-speciﬁc weighted average costs of capital. Analysing the

geographic distribution of production and supply costs, we ﬁnd that production costs

dominate the supply cost composition for liquid or easily liqueﬁable commodities, while

transport costs dominate for gaseous commodities. In the case of Germany, importing

green ammonia could be more cost-efﬁcient than domestic production from locally pro-

duced or imported hydrogen. Green ammonia could be supplied to Germany from many

regions worldwide at below the cost of domestic production, with costs ranging from 624 to
874 $/t NH3 and Norway being the cheapest supplier. Ammonia production using imported
hydrogen from Spain could be cost-effective if a pan-European hydrogen pipeline grid

based on repurposed natural gas pipelines exists.

© 2022 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: michael.moritz@ewi.uni-koeln.de (M. Moritz).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.12.046
0360-3199/© 2022 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

9140

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 4 8 ( 2 0 2 3 ) 9 1 3 9 e9 1 5 4

Introduction

Many countries decarbonise their energy systems by using
renewable energies to mitigate climate change and achieve a
sustainable energy supply. Renewable energy sources (RES), in
particular wind and solar energy, can be used to produce
green electricity. In addition to green electricity, hydrogen and
hydrogen-based green energy commodities are projected to
play a signiﬁcant role in the decarbonisation of so-called hard-
to-abate sectors, where direct electriﬁcation is difﬁcult. Ap-
plications for synthetic green energy commodities could be
long-term energy storage, feedstock for industrial processes
and use as fuel in heavy duty transport or aviation [1].

Production potentials for green energy commodities are
distributed unevenly around the globe. Countries with a high
energy demand do not necessarily have access to large RES
potentials. Germany, for example, would have to continue to
rely on energy imports as part of a cost-effective decarbon-
isation strategy [2e7]. Even in the long term, Germany will
probably have to cover up to half of its energy demand using
molecule-based energy carriers [3]. A considerable part of these
molecule-based energy carriers might be synthetic green en-
ergy commodities due to limited sustainable biomass poten-
tials. Green hydrogen plays a central role. Hydrogen can be
used energetically or as a feedstock for hydrogen-based com-
modities such as ammonia, methane, methanol or Fischer-
Tropsch fuels like synthetic kerosene, gasoline or diesel.

Many hydrogen-based energy commodities have physical
properties that make them easier to transport and store than
hydrogen. At ambient conditions, gaseous energy carriers
such as hydrogen and methane are more difﬁcult to transport
than liquid, or easily liqueﬁable energy carriers such as
methanol, kerosene, or ammonia. In addition, hydrogen has a
volumetric energy density three times lower than methane.
Both methane and hydrogen can be liqueﬁed for maritime
transport. However, the temperatures required to liquefy
hydrogen are signiﬁcantly lower than for methane, making
the shipping of liquid hydrogen more energy-intensive and
expensive. Furthermore, hydrogen-based commodities such
as methane, methanol, ammonia or Fischer-Tropsch products
are substitutes for fossil energy carriers and can use existing
infrastructure for transport.

The quantiﬁcation of supply costs requires an assessment
of the entire supply chain. Several studies have analysed
production and transport costs for hydrogen and hydrogen-
based energy carriers. Fasihi et al. [8] investigate costs for
renewable power-to-liquid (PtL) fuels from PV wind hybrid
sources in 2030. They evaluate production costs by modelling
approach an integrated 5 GWe plant consisting of electrolysis,
direct air capture (DAC) as CO2 source, Fischer-tropsch syn-
thesis and battery storage. In a ﬁrst step, the capacities of the
plant components are optimised. Based on these optimal ca-
pacities, the operation of the plant is then optimised to
minimise the production costs. The authors analyse a poten-
tial PtL supply chain from Patagonia to Rotterdam and ﬁnd
that PtL supply costs are 84 $/MWh. They also investigate the
sensitivity of investment risks on production costs: changing
the weighted average costs of capital (WACC) from 5% to 7%
increases the overall supply costs by 14.5%.

Agora Verkehrswende, Agora Energiewende and Frontier
Economics [9] published a study estimating supply costs for
power-to-methane and PtL-fuels from North Africa, the Mid-
dle East, Iceland and the North and Baltic Seas to Germany
until 2050 for three different scenarios. While the study con-
siders direct air capture (DAC) as a CO2 source, the corre-
sponding spreadsheet model by Frontier Economics [10] also
considers carbon capture from the cement industry as an
alternative option.

Another study by Frontier Economics [11] analyses global
production and export potentials of hydrogen and hydrogen-
based commodities. Countries are assessed based on three
criteria: ﬁrstly, costs of generating RES electricity, secondly
area-speciﬁc resource potentials, and thirdly political stabil-
ity, energy political framework and trade. The study identiﬁes
promising exporting countries to Europe and Germany based
on these criteria. Detailed case studies are carried out for the
exporter countries Norway, Chile, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Australia and China. The study does not provide production or
supply cost estimates.

Hank et al. [12] investigate the costs and energy efﬁciency
of hydrogen and hydrogen-based commodities methane,
methanol and ammonia while also considering liqueﬁed
hydrogen (LH2) and hydrogen bound in liquid organic
hydrogen carriers (LOHC) for transport for a baseline and an
optimistic scenario in 2030. The paper provides energy efﬁ-
ciencies of the respective supply chains, including production
from integrated plants (including excess heat integration) and
long-distance maritime transport. Moreover, production and
maritime transport costs from Morocco to Germany are eval-
uated in detail. They ﬁnd that commodities with high energy
efﬁciencies and low production costs are LH2 (52e60%, 149
$/MWh) and ammonia (48e52%, 146 $/MWh). All other ana-
lysed commodities are more costly in production and have a
lower energy efﬁciency.

Br€andle et al. [13] estimate the development of global
production and supply cost of low-carbon hydrogen from
wind and solar energy sources as well as from natural gas with
carbon capture and storage (CCS) and methane pyrolysis in 90
countries. An optimisation model minimises hydrogen pro-
duction costs by determining optimal capacity ratios for
electrolyse-RES systems. The results are accessible and cus-
tomisable in a comprehensive spreadsheet model [14]. The
authors ﬁnd that hydrogen supply costs are likely to vary
substantially from country to country, depending on natural
gas prices, RES potentials and access to existing pipeline
networks which may be retroﬁtted to carry hydrogen. They
conclude that due to the high costs of maritime hydrogen
transport, international trade in pure hydrogen is more likely
to develop along pipeline networks.

Pfennig et al. [15] use a geospatial information system
(GIS)-based approach to estimate production costs and po-
tentials and their geographical location. The study covers
hydrogen and hydrogen-based methanol, methane and PtL
fuels. The authors use GIS to identify suitable areas for low-
cost solar and wind energy production. Potentials are further
reﬁned by applying criteria relating to land use, distance to
settlements and infrastructure, and ecological restrictions.
The authors evaluate cost-optimal production systems,
including battery storage in exporting countries and the

