i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 4 8 ( 2 0 2 3 ) 1 1 2 3 7 e1 1 2 7 3

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / h e

Recent advances in ammonia synthesis
technologies: Toward future zero carbon emissions

Mostafa El-Shaﬁe

, Shinji Kambara

*

Environmental and Renewable Energy Systems Division, Gifu University, Gifu City, Japan

h i g h l i g h t s

(cid:1) The ammonia synthesis processes were assessed including conventional Haber-Bosch technology.
(cid:1) The catalytic materials of ammonia synthesis were reviewed.
(cid:1) The novel analysis of ammonia production methods has been compared.
(cid:1) Fundamental of ammonia combustion was reviewed.
(cid:1) The future end-use vision of energy sources was proposed to achieve low carbon emissions.

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:

Received 28 December 2021

Received in revised form

29 July 2022

Accepted 6 September 2022

Available online 1 October 2022

Keywords:

Hydrogen production

Ammonia synthesis

Plasma

Sustainability

As a carbon-free molecule, ammonia has gained great global interest in being considered a

signiﬁcant future candidate for the transition toward renewable energy. Numerous appli-

cations of ammonia as a fuel have been developed for energy generation, heavy trans-

portation, and clean, distributed energy storage. There is a clear global target to achieve a
sustainable economy and carbon neutrality. Therefore, most of the research's efforts are
concentrated on generating cost-effective renewable energy on a large scale rather than

fossil fuels. However, storage and transportation are still roadblocks for these technologies,

for example, hydrogen technologies. Ammonia could be replaced as a viable fuel for a clean

and sustainable future of global energy. More efforts from governments and scientists can

lead to making ammonia a clean energy vector in most energy applications. In this review,
ammonia synthesis was assessed, including conventional HabereBosch technology. Current
hydrogen technologies as the key parameters for ammonia generation are also evaluated.

The role of ammonia as a hydrogen-based fuel and generation roadmap are discussed for

future utilization of energy mix. Further, ammonia generation processes are addressed in

depth, including blue and green ammonia generation. A survey of ammonia synthesis cat-

alytic materials was conducted and the role of catalyst materials in ammonia generation was

compared, which showed that the Ru-based catalyst generated the maximum ammonia

after 20 h of starting experiment. An end-use plan for using ammonia as a clean energy fuel in

vehicles, marines, gas turbines as well as fuel cells, is brieﬂy discussed to recognize the

potential applications of ammonia use. The practical and future end-use vision of energy

sources is proposed to achieve great beneﬁts at low carbon emissions and costs. This review

can provide prospective knowledge of large-scale aspects and environmental considerations
of ammonia. Herein, we conclude that ammonia will become the “clean energy carrier link”
that will achieve the global energy and economy sustainability targets.

© 2022 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: mostafaelshaﬁe81@gmail.com (M. El-Shaﬁe).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.09.061
0360-3199/© 2022 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

11238

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f h y d r o g e n e n e r g y 4 8 ( 2 0 2 3 ) 1 1 2 3 7 e1 1 2 7 3

Introduction

All emitted greenhouse gases (GHGs), especially carbon diox-
ide (CO2) massively contribute to the climate change effect by
creating greenhouse thermal radiation traps that lead to
increased atmosphere or environment temperature. As a
result, a sharp increase in global temperatures has been re-
ported [1]. This increase in temperature will promote ice
melting that will raise the ocean's water level and have many
other impacts on the environment. The registered global
temperature increase is approximately 1 (cid:3)C. Because of the
impact of GHGs on climate change, various technologies have
been developed to reduce or avoid the CO2 emission from
current fossil fuels and their applications. The predicted,
human-caused annual emission by from 2015 to 2100 has
been investigated [2].

Thus, the transformation from conventional

fuels to
renewable energy is considered an urgent issue to reduce GHG
emissions. Recently, renewable energy sources have received
much more interest in creating new global energy shifts for
low-carbon or carbon-free energy resources. Solar and wind
energy are the solutions for most large-scale power generation.
Battery storage can address some of the current energy chal-
lenges, but it cannot be applied to large-scale applications.
Wind energy is the most commercial renewable energy source
in the world. Wind turbines have been developed to become
taller, bigger hubs with large-diameter rotors. The wind tur-
bine farm capacity has reached 659 MW [3]. Power generation
from wind turbines will increase in the next 20 years [2].

Solar energy, such as wind energy, has also gained great
worldwide attention. It is considered as a paramount energy
source for renewable energy production. Solar energy tech-
nology applications, such as photovoltaics (PVs), solar heating/
cooling, and solar thermal electricity, are well established [2,4].
Nonetheless, solar and wind energy depend on environmental
conditions, locations, and seasonal periods. The liqueﬁed form
is the preferred option for energy storage, which is generated
from renewable energy sources in a low-cost and sustainable
manner [5]. A development system has been proposed for the
production of carbon-free hydrogen from the liqueﬁed natural
gas through a solar-driven catalytic thermal cracking process
integrated into the ammonia synthesis unit [6]. Further, a new,
integrated solar-based ammonia synthesis and fuel cell sys-
tem has been presented [7]. The integrated solar system was
simulated on the average day of each month, and the energy
and exergy analysis were also demonstrated. The design and
optimization of an ammonia synthesis system is also pre-
sented in this review for ammonia-based solar thermochem-
ical energy storage consisting of a heat recovery reactor to heat
supercritical steam and a preconditioning system to preheat
the feed gas to a sufﬁciently high temperature [8,9].

Liquid organic hydrogen carrier (LOHC) systems have
recently received great interest for hydrogen storage and
transportation. State-of-the-art catalysts for hydrogen storage
in LOHC have been developed [10]. There are different options
for generating liquid energy carriers, such as liqueﬁed
hydrogen, LOHCs, ammonia, and products of CO2 reduction.
The processes of CO2 reduction and liquefying hydrogen are
the costliest, which should also be considered, apart from

factors like safety and utility. The effect of the degree of hy-
drogenation on the viscosity, surface tension, and density of
the LOHC system based on diphenylmethane has been
investigated [11]. The mechanisms of hydrogen transfer pro-
cesses for different LOHCs have been reviewed. It has been
found that the evaluation was signiﬁcant for large-scale
implementation of LOHCs in sustainable fuel production
[12]. Ammonia has emerged as a great clean energy source for
future global renewable energy fuel sources [13,14]. The pro-
cess of electrochemical ammonia synthesis at ambient tem-
perature and pressure can be used to generate green
ammonia. The main challenges are the low ammonia pro-
duction and the low long-term stability of the catalyst mate-
rials. Recently, green ammonia synthesis using CeO2/RuO2
nanolayers on vertical graphene catalyst via electrochemical
route in alkaline electrolytes has been investigated to enhance
ammonia yield and catalytic material lifetime [15]. The CeO2
showed the highest performance of the ammonia synthesis
yield. Furthermore, green ammonia synthesis using photo-
assisted electrochemical-based demonstrators has been
studied [16]. The ammonia synthesis without CO2 emission
and low energy consumption is considered signiﬁcant. Hence,
an energy-efﬁcient process of small-scale ammonia synthesis
with plasma-enabled nitrogen oxidation and catalytic reduc-
tion of adsorbed NOx is presented [17]. The renewable electric
sources, such as water electrolysis powered by solar or wind
energy sources, should be used in the electrochemical
ammonia synthesis process. A global transition to the massive
production of carbon-free energy is needed. However, pro-
cesses of storage, transportation, and utilization of renewable
energy on a large scale have still not been fully developed.
Energy decarbonization via green hydrogen or ammonia has
been reviewed [18]. Green hydrogen and green ammonia as
sustainable future energy vectors have been considered.

Ammonia can be easily liqueﬁed at ambient temperature
and a moderate pressure of 10 bar or at atmospheric pressure
by cooling down to (cid:4)33 (cid:3)C. Furthermore, ammonia as a fuel
exposed a narrow ﬂammability range, high power to fuel efﬁ-
ciency which making it safe [19]. However, ammonia is a toxic
compound, high emission of NOx, NH3 residuals, and the
reactivity as a fuel is relatively low [20]. Various studies were
conducted to enhance the ammonia combustion process and
pollutant reduction. Ammonia is primarily generated by a
well-established conventional process called “Haber-Bosch”.
Most of the ammonia thus generated is utilized in fertilizer
production; the annual worldwide ammonia production is
about 180 million tons, making it the second most global
commercially manufactured chemical [21,22]. HabereBosch
technology has been used for industrial ammonia produc-
tion. Hydrogen is produced by the steam reforming process
from fossil fuels (methane or coal), and then it combines with
nitrogen generated from air by the cryogenic process to pro-
duce ammonia [23]. Ammonia can be transported using the
current infrastructure of fossil fuels. Ammonia can be seen as a
clean hydrogen energy carrier link, which can be used as a
hydrogen supplier. An investigation of the supply chain
context, including ammonia decomposition to hydrogen and
nitrogen gas, has been conducted to distribute ammonia like
hydrogen [24]. Ammonia decomposition has been investigated

