Renewable Energy 126 (2018) 322e331

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Renewable Energy

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / r e n e n e

ERA5: The new champion of wind power modelling?

Jon Olauson a, b, *
a Division of Electricity, Department of Engineering Sciences, Uppsala University, Sweden
b Integration of Renewable Energy Sources Group, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 27 September 2017
Received in revised form
28 February 2018
Accepted 22 March 2018
Available online 26 March 2018

Keywords:
ERA5
MERRA-2
Wind power modelling
Long-term correction
Reanalyses

Output from meteorological reanalyses are used extensively in both academia and industry for modelling
wind power. Recently, the ﬁrst batch of the new ERA5 reanalysis was released. The main purpose of this
paper is to compare the performance of ERA5 and MERRA-2 (a commonly used reanalysis today) in terms
of modelling i) the aggregated wind generation in ﬁve different countries and ii) the generation for 1051
individual wind turbines in Sweden. The modelled wind power generation was compared to measure-
ments. In conclusion, ERA5 performs better than MERRA-2 in all analysed aspects; correlations are
higher, mean absolute and root mean square errors are in average around 20% lower and distributions of
both hourly data and changes in hourly data are more similar to those for measurements. It is also shown
that the uncertainty related to long-term correction (using one year of measurements and reanalysis data
to predict the energy production during the remaining 1e5 years) is 20% lower for ERA5. In fact, using
one year sample data and ERA5 gives slightly more accurate estimates than using two years of sample
data and MERRA-2. Additionally, a new metric for quantifying the system size and dispersion of wind
farms is proposed.

© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Quoting Ref. [1], “reanalysis is the process whereby an un-
changing data assimilation system is used to provide a consistent
reprocessing of meteorological observations, typically spanning an
extended segment of the historical data record”. The products from
a reanalysis include many variables such as wind speeds, temper-
ature and atmospheric pressure and are used extensively for
modelling wind power both in academia and industry. Examples of
applications include generation of long wind power time series for
grid integration studies and long-term correction (LTC) of wind
speed measurements conducted prior to the construction of wind
farms. An important advantage of reanalyses is that these are often
freely and globally available.

Over the decades, new reanalyses have gradually become more
high-resolved in time and space [2]. During the last years, MERRA
[3] and MERRA-2 [1] (both produced by NASA) have been very
popular for modelling wind power generation [4e14] due to, e.g.,
the hourly temporal resolution and adequate height for wind
speeds (50 m). A general conclusion from the studies cited above is

* Kungliga Tekniska H€ogskolan, SE-100 44, Stockholm, Sweden.

E-mail address: olauson@gmail.com.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.03.056
0960-1481/© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

that MERRA gives good results in terms of country-wise wind po-
wer generation (relatively low errors when comparing to
measurements).

During 2017e2018, a new reanalysis named ERA5 [15] will be
released. Contrary to its predecessor ERA-Interim [16], ERA5 has
hourly resolution and wind speed data is freely available at 100 m
height, i.e. relevant for modern wind turbines (WTs). The horizontal
resolution is around 31 km, which is better than ERA-Interim and
MERRA. The main objective of this paper is to compare the per-
formance of MERRA-2 and ERA5 in terms of modelling wind power,
both for countries and for individual WTs. For the former, the
generation in Germany, Denmark, France, Sweden and Bonneville
Power Administration (BPA) in north-west USA were analysed. For
simplicity, BPA is denoted a “country” in the remaining of this pa-
per. For the analysis of individual WTs, hourly time series for more
than 1000 Swedish units were obtained.

The most common approach for modelling country-wise wind
power from reanalyses is to i) generate wind speed time series for
each site, ii) transform wind speed to power via a power curve (PC)
and iii) aggregate. Regarding point i), the reanalysis wind speeds
can either be scaled so that a desired mean generation is met [9,10]
or calculated from reanalysis data at different model heights [4,12]
(possibly using statistical [6] or dynamical [17] downscaling). When
transforming wind speed to power, some authors [4,9] use one

J. Olauson / Renewable Energy 126 (2018) 322e331

323

generic PC while others [6,12] use farm speciﬁc ditto. It is common
to alter the original PCs, e.g. using smoother “multi-turbine” power
curves [4,12]. Especially for larger countries, it may be important to
handle the maximum country-wise output, which can be consid-
erably lower than the installed capacity [4,10,12]. Post-processing
of the outputs at any of steps i-iii) is possible for improving the
results. Examples include correction of seasonal and diurnal biases
[10] and noise addition for a better representation of observed wind
power variability.

The remainder of the paper is structured in the following
manner. First, the two reanalyses and all measurement datasets are
described. In Section 3, the methods used are presented, including a
suggestion for a new metric describing the geographical di-
mensions of a wind power system. Subsequently the results are
given and the paper is concluded with a short discussion.

Several different datasets were retrieved for the purpose of this
study. The two reanalyses are described in Section 2.1 while mea-
surements and metadata are described in Section 2.2.

2. Data

2.1. Reanalyses

In this work, the performance of MERRA-2 and ERA5 are
compared. Other freely available reanalyses also exist (e.g. ERA-
Interim and JRA-55), but have lower spatiotemporal resolutions
and heights for wind speed data.

The ﬁrst version of MERRA, the “Modern-Era Retrospective
Analysis for Research and Applications”, was released in 2009. In
early 2016 the production stopped and was replaced by MERRA-2
which is now updated in “near real-time”, i.e. data is available
with a couple of months lag. For the purpose of modelling wind
power, these two reanalyses perform similarly [12].

The ﬁrst batch of the ERA5 dataset, produced by the European
Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), was
released in July 2017 and covers the period 2010e2016. Subse-
quently, ERA5 will span 1950 to near real-time. Some important
properties of MERRA-2 and ERA5 are shown in Table 1. For com-
parison, data for ERA-Interim, the predecessor of ERA5, are also
given. ECMWF reanalyses are produced on reduced Gaussian grids,
i.e. using different number of grid points along different latitudes
and thus keeping the grid point separation in metres approximately
constant. Since the data is downloaded on a user-deﬁned regular
lat/lon grid, the resolutions given in Table 1 are only approximate.
Downloading with a higher resolution is possible, but this merely
implies an interpolation of the data.

The spatial resolutions of ERA5 and MERRA-2 are illustrated
qualitatively in Fig. 1. For comparison, mean wind speeds from the
meso-scale model MIUU [18] (spatial resolution 0.5 km) are also
shown. Note that data from the native model heights are shown

Table 1
Information on the two reanalyses considered in this study (MERRA-2 and ERA5).
For comparison, data for ERA-Interim, the predecessor of ERA5, is also shown. The
spatial resolutions of the ERA reanalyses are approximate (see Section 2.1). In gen-
eral, wind speed data are available at several heights or pressure levels. Only the
most proper for modelling wind power is given here.

MERRA-2

ERA-Interim

ERA5

Temporal resolution
Spatial resolution
Coverage

1 h
0:5(cid:4) (cid:5) 0:625(cid:4)
1980e

6 h
79 km (z0:75(cid:4))
1979e

Wind speed height

50 m

10 m

1 h
31 km (z0:28(cid:4))
2010e2016,
soon 1950e
100 m

(50 m for MERRA-2 and 100 m for ERA-I) and that the colors thus
represent different ranges of mean wind speeds. Although ERA5
gives more correct patterns than MERRA-2 e.g. along the coast, it is
obvious that none of the reanalyses are capable of resolving the
local variations, especially in more complex terrain. Using rean-
alyses directly for determining the mean wind speed at a site is
therefore not recommended.

2.2. Wind power measurements and metadata

In order to model country-wise generation and to evaluate the

results, the following measurements and metadata were used:

1. Coordinates, capacity and,

if available, commissioning and

decommissioning dates of each farm.

2. Hourly measurements of nation-wide generation.
3. Time series of the installed capacity corresponding to the
measured generation. Since the wind farm database might be
incomplete and that commissioning/decommissioning dates
might not be available, this time series can differ from the one
calculated from the wind farm data (item one in this list). The
measured and modelled generation time series were therefore
normalised to their corresponding capacity time series in order
½t(cid:2).
to get comparable per unit generation; pp:u:½t(cid:2) ¼ pMW ½t(cid:2)=pinst

For Germany, Denmark and France, data were retrieved from the
“Open Power System Data” (OPSD) database (data packages
“Renewable power plants” version 2017-07-03 and “Time series”
version 2017-07-09). Primary data are from various sources, for a
complete list see Ref. [19]. Since coordinates for German offshore
farms were lacking or seemed suspicious, these were instead ob-
tained from wikipedia.org. The latter source was also used for
country-wise installed capacities (linear interpolation of end-of-
½t(cid:2)). BPA generation
year values was employed to calculate pinst
time series and farm metadata except coordinates were retrieved
from Ref. [20]. Coordinates for BPA farms were obtained from on-
line sources;
thewindpower.net, wikipedia.org and farm de-
velopers' web pages. The BPA generation time series is given with
ﬁve-minute resolution, so the data were averaged into hourly
blocks.

Generation measurements for individual Swedish WTs were
obtained from the Cesar database. This dataset can be retrieved by
request from the Swedish Energy Agency and a more thorough
description can be found in Ref.
[21]. Only wind turbines
commissioned year 2000 or later with a capacity of (cid:3) 1 MW and at
least one year records were considered. Wind turbines for which
the rated capacity changed during the measurement period and
measurements taken for farms in aggregation were also excluded.
In total, 1e6 year long time series for 1051 WTs remained to be
analysed.

For Sweden, generation time series for individual WTs but no
coordinates were available. The latter were therefore estimated
from the reanalyses grid points with the highest correlation be-
tween modelled and measured generation. Since choosing the best
ﬁtting data could potentially give overly optimistic results, a test
was performed. Relatively exact coordinates for ten randomly
chosen WTs were found from the developers/owners web pages
and reanalyses time series were computed for these sites. The
corresponding correlations to measurements were in principle
identical to those obtained from the best ﬁtting time series; the
largest difference for a single WT was 0.001 and the average cor-
relations were the same within three digits precision.
It was
therefore concluded that estimating coordinates from the best
ﬁtting reanalyses grid points does not skew the results (neither
positively nor negatively). It can be mentioned that the mean

