Renewable Energy 94 (2016) 629e636

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Renewable Energy

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / r e n e n e

Wind speed forecasting based on the hybrid ensemble empirical mode
decomposition and GA-BP neural network method

Shouxiang Wang a, *
, Na Zhang b, Lei Wu c, Yamin Wang c
a Key Laboratory of Smart Grid of Ministry of Education (Tianjin University), Tianjin 300072, China
b Hulunbuir University, Hailaer 021008, China
c Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699, USA

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 31 August 2015
Received in revised form
9 March 2016
Accepted 27 March 2016
Available online 6 April 2016

Keywords:
EMD
EEMD
GA
BP neural network
Wind speed forecasting

Wind speed is the major factor that affects the wind generation, and in turn the forecasting accuracy of
wind speed is the key to wind power prediction. In this paper, a wind speed forecasting method based on
improved empirical mode decomposition (EMD) and GA-BP neural network is proposed. EMD has been
applied extensively for analyzing nonlinear stochastic signals. Ensemble empirical mode decomposition
(EEMD) is an improved method of EMD, which can effectively handle the mode-mixing problem and
decompose the original data into more stationary signals with different frequencies. Each signal is taken
as an input data to the GA-BP neural network model. The ﬁnal forecasted wind speed data is obtained by
aggregating the predicted data of individual signals. Cases study of a wind farm in Inner Mongolia, China,
shows that the proposed hybrid method is much more accurate than the traditional GA-BP forecasting
approach and GA-BP with EMD and wavelet neural network method. By the sensitivity analysis of pa-
rameters, it can be seen that appropriate settings on parameters can improve the forecasting result. The
simulation with MATLAB shows that the proposed method can improve the forecasting accuracy and
computational efﬁciency, which make it suitable for on-line ultra-short term (10 min) and short term
(1 h) wind speed forecasting.

© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Wind energy, being economically competitive and environmen-
tally friendly, has become the fastest growing renewable energy
resource for electricity generation. The wind speed forecast is of great
importance for predicting the power output of wind energy systems.
However, the biggest challenge in forecasting wind speed is its
intermittency and uncertainty. Many forecasting methods have
been proposed recently to predict wind speeds over different time-
scales. They include physical models, time series method, grey
model method, artiﬁcial neural network, support vector machine
(SVM) method, the wavelet transform method, empirical mode
decomposition method, etc. Each method has its own advantages
and limitations. For instance, the complex physical models always
rely on the numeric weather prediction (NWP) system and the
required input data are usually difﬁcult to obtain [1,2]. Statistical
forecasting models, such as autoregressive moving average (ARMA)

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: sxwang@tju.edu.cn (S. Wang).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2016.03.103
0960-1481/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

models, were described in Ref. [3]. The parameters could be a
function of time and the performance of ARMA forecast models
would vary when applied to different time periods. A grey model
GM (1, 1) based technique was presented in Ref. [4] for one hour
ahead wind speed forecasting. However, this model may be suitable
for certain sites with speciﬁc wind characteristics, but would not be
generalizable to other locations. Artiﬁcial neural network was
applied in wind speed forecasting in Refs. [5,6]. Three different
neural networks including BP, adaptive linear element, and RBF for
1-h ahead wind speed forecasting were compared in Ref. [7]. These
methods could approximate complex nonlinear functions, but with
a complex network structure, the training time would be very long
and more liable to fall into local minimum value. In order to
improve the performance of artiﬁcial neural network, some re-
searchers applied genetic algorithm to update its learning rule and
the network weights, which improves the learning rate and the
ability to approach to global optimality. On the other hand, the
wavelet transform can provide the frequency of signals and the
time associated with those frequencies, which makes it very
convenient for the application in forecasting ﬁelds, but the fore-
casting accuracy depends on the choice of base functions [8,9].

630

S. Wang et al. / Renewable Energy 94 (2016) 629e636

Based on SVM-enhanced Markov model, the short-term distribu-
tional forecasts and point forecasts were also derived in Ref. [10].
Hybrid methods, such as the combined fuzzy logic and artiﬁcial
neural network approach, were established in Ref. [11], which may
outperform individual methods.

Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) has been applied exten-
sively for analyzing nonlinear stochastic signals. Compared with
wavelet transformation and Fourier transformation, it has many ad-
vantages such as good multi-resolution and wide applicability. How-
ever, the most signiﬁcant drawback of EMD is mode mixing. To
overcome this problem, a new noise-assisted data analysis method
called ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD) was pro-
posed. The superiority of EEMD has been tested in many ﬁelds [12e15].
This paper proposes a novel wind speed forecasting method
based on a hybrid EEMD and GA-BP neural network method. The
original wind speed data is decomposed into certain signals by
EEMD. Then, each signal is taken as an input data to establish the
GA-BP neural network forecasting model. The ﬁnal wind speed
forecast is obtained by aggregating the predicted data of individual
signals. The applicability of the proposed hybrid method for
different time-scale wind speed forecasting is also discussed.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the prin-
ciples of EMD and EEMD. Section 3 introduces the GA-BP neural
network. The proposed hybrid model is described in Section 4. Case
studies and conclusions are drawn in Section 5 and Section 6,
respectively.

separating c1 from the rest of the data (3). Then, take r1 as the new
original signal x(t), repeat the operations in Step (a) and Step (b)
until the second IMF c2 is obtained. In order to get all IMFs, the
above operations should be taken j times until rj is smaller than the
predetermined threshold or rj becomes a monotone function.
Finally, a series of IMFs and the residue r can be obtained.

r1 ¼ xðtÞ (cid:2) c1

(3)

2.2. Ensemble empirical mode decomposition

Mode mixing is the most signiﬁcant drawback of EMD, which
implies that a single IMF consists of signals with dramatically
disparate scales or a signal of the same scale appears in different
IMF components. This usually causes intermittency when using
EMD to analyze signals.

To solve the mode mixing problem in EMD, a new noise-assisted
data analysis method EEMD is proposed. In EEMD, the true IMF
components are deﬁned as the mean of an ensemble of trails. Each
trail consists of the decomposition results of the signal plus a white
noise of ﬁnite amplitude [17]. EEMD beneﬁts from recent studies on
white noises, which showed that EMD is an effective self-adaptive
dyadic ﬁlter bank when applied to white noises [18,19]. The results
demonstrate that noise can help data analysis in the EMD method.
The EEMD algorithm is described as follows:

2. Principles of empirical mode decomposition and ensemble
empirical mode decomposition

1) Add a white noise series to the original wind speed signal.
2) Decompose the signal with added white noise into IMFs using

2.1. Empirical mode decomposition

Hilbert-Huang transform, developed by Huang et al., in 1998, is
an adaptive and efﬁcient method for analyzing nonlinear and non-
stationary signals and its key part is EMD [16]. Since the wind speed
is a kind of nonlinear and non-stationary signal, this method is
efﬁcient to analyze the wind speed signal. A series of intrinsic mode
functions (IMFs) is extracted from the original signal by sifting stage
by stage. An IMF is a function that satisﬁes the following two
conditions: (1) in the entire data set, the number of extrema and
the number of zero crossings must either be equal or differ at most
by one; and (2) at any point, the mean value of the envelopes
deﬁned by the local maxima and the local minima must be zero.

With the above deﬁnitions for IMF, a signal could be decom-

posed through the following steps [16]:

For wind speed signal x(t), identifying all local maxima and
minima. Connect all maxima by a cubic spline line to produce the
upper envelop, and connect all minima by another cubic spline line
to produce the lower envelop. The mean value of the upper and the
lower envelops is deﬁned as m, and the difference between x(t) and
m is deﬁned as h.

h ¼ xðtÞ (cid:2) m

Take h as the new original signal x(t), and repeat Step (a) k times
until h is an IMF. The criterion (2) is used to determine whether h is
an IMF.

¼

Dk

P
T
t¼0
P
T
t¼0

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)hðk(cid:2)1ÞðtÞ (cid:2) hk
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
2
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)hðk(cid:2)1ÞðtÞ

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

2

ðtÞ

EMD.

3) Repeat Steps (1) and (2) with different white noises and obtain
the corresponding IMF components. The number of repeated
procedures is called the ensemble number.

4) Take the mean of all IMF components and the mean of residue

components as the ﬁnal results.

In EMD, the combination of all IMFs and the residue r is the
original data. However, in EEMD, the combination is no longer the
original data because of added white noises. When applying EEMD,
one may argue that the forecasting results will become worse
because the original data have been changed. On the contrary, the
truth is that as better decomposed IMFs can be obtained by EEMD
and the signals of IMFs become smooth, the accuracy of forecasting
results has been signiﬁcantly enhanced. More detailed discussion
on this is provided in Section 4.

2.3. Comparison between EMD and EEMD

To better illustrate the superiority of EEMD over EMD, a simple
example is shown below. In Fig. 1, signal y1 denotes a sinusoid
signal y1 ¼ sin(20pt), y2 denotes an intermittent
signal

(1)

y2 ¼

8
<

:

0:4 sinð100ptÞ 0:05 (cid:3) t (cid:3) 0:15
(cid:2)0:2 sinð300ptÞ 0:2 (cid:3) t (cid:3) 0:25
0 others

, and y denotes y ¼ y1 þ y2.

signal y in Fig. 1 is decomposed by EMD and EEMD. The ﬁrst and the
second IMFs of EMD are shown in Fig. 2 and those of EEMD are
shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 2, it is obvious that signals with different
frequencies exit in IMF1. However, in Fig. 3, it is observed that this
mode mixing problem is solved by EEMD and the two signals with
different frequencies have been successfully separated.

(2)

Here, if Dk is smaller than the predetermined value, hk can be

3. The GA-BP neural network

considered as an IMF. Designate the ﬁrst IMF as c1 ¼ hk.

Once c1 is determined, the residue r1 can be obtained by

Genetic Algorithm (GA) is a powerful stochastic algorithm based

