Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Heliyon 

journal homepage: www.cell.com/heliyon 

Research article 

Investigating the role of nuclear power and battery storage in 
Hungary’s energy transition using hourly resolution electricity 
market simulations 

Bence Bir´o *, Attila Asz´odi 
Institute of Nuclear Techniques, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Budapest University of Technology and Economics, M˝uegyetem rkp. 9, H-1111, 
Budapest, Hungary   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Grid scale battery storage 
Hourly power system simulation for Central 
Europe 
Nuclear energy 
Renewable energy 
Sensitivity analysis on effects of weather data 
Technical and economic data on power plants 

Electricity supply in European countries faces a number of challenges, such as achieving carbon 
neutrality,  tackling  rising  prices,  reducing  dependence  on  fossil  fuels,  including  fossil  fuel  im-
ports. To achieve these goals, the electricity systems of all European countries will have to un-
dergo major changes, while taking into account technical, environmental, economic and social 
objectives. Our simulations provide essential data for this transition by analyzing different power 
plant portfolios and electricity consumption scenarios. The analyses focus on the cooperation of 
nuclear power and weather-dependent renewables, and on the possible role that battery-based 
electricity storage can play in the Hungarian electricity system. 

In this paper, we present the experience gained in setting up an electricity market model and 
the results of running the model on the electricity systems of Hungary and its six neighboring 
countries  (Slovakia,  Romania,  Serbia,  Croatia,  Slovenia  and  Austria),  taking  into  account  the 
constraints  of  the  cross-border  capacities.  The  results  of  the  sensitivity  analysis  for  the  2030 
power plant portfolios, battery capacities and renewables analyzed in this paper cover Hungary’s 
import/export position, the energy source structure of its electricity generation, battery opera-
tion, CO2 emissions from electricity generation, expected prices in the system and the utilization 
parameters of nuclear power plants.   

1. Introduction 

The energy supply faces many challenges in the short and long term. The main aspects of these challenges are tackling climate 
change, achieving sustainability, while ensuring affordable and secure energy supply. The European Union has set a target for the 
decarbonization of the energy sector under the European Green Deal [1], which means that countries’ electricity systems should be net 
zero carbon by 2050 [2]. 

To achieve the decarbonization targets, the electricity system in European countries will have to undergo significant changes, 
taking  into  account  technical,  environmental,  economic  and  social  aspects.  The  path  to  achieving  the  targets  will  be  further 
complicated by the ongoing Russian-Ukrainian war, which has led to a rise in energy prices and has led European countries to set 
themselves the objective of reducing their dependence on Russian fossil energy imports. Taking all these factors into account, it can be 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: biro.bence@reak.bme.hu (B. Bir´o).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e29841 
Received 15 December 2023; Received in revised form 28 March 2024; Accepted 16 April 2024   

Heliyon10(2024)e29841Availableonline18April20242405-8440/©2024TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NClicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).B. Bir´o and A. Asz´odi                                                                                                                                                                                                 

concluded that the most important task for European countries is to replace fossil fuels, reduce Russian energy source imports and keep 
prices at affordable levels. 

According to the analysis of several authors, such as Buongiorno et al. [3], Dincer et al. [4] and the ENTSO-E and ENTSOG joint 
report [5], renewable energy, nuclear energy, grid-scale electricity storage and hydrogen technology can play a major role in this 
challenge. However, these technologies are either still in the demonstration phase (grid-scale battery based storage, hydrogen) or there 
is  little  data  on  their  stable  and  sustainable  cooperation  (e.g.  weather-dependent  renewables  and  nuclear  power),  so  a  detailed 
technical, economic and environmental analysis of the systems composed of these technologies is essential. 

In order to achieve decarbonization targets, the European Union has required member states to prepare a National Energy and 
Climate Plan (NECP) [6], which outlines the country’s path towards a net zero-emission energy system. Following the publication of 
each country’s plan, a number of studies have been carried out to analyses them. Simoglou and Biskas [7], for example, evaluate the 
Greek NECP and demonstrates that the plan to phase out lignite and deploy renewables on a large scale will lead to a gradual but 
radical transformation of the energy mix, in which pumped-storage hydro power plants are expected to play a key role in mitigating the 
negative effects of intermittent renewable generation. Williges and colleagues [8] point out that the implementation of NECPs may 
lead to underestimation  of impacts, failure to reduce  greenhouse gas emissions  or increased resistance to climate  policies due to 
neglecting key aspects ("efficiency, effectiveness and feasibility"). 

The role of nuclear energy in the decarbonization process has been the subject of several recent studies. Kindi and colleagues [9] 
have shown that linking nuclear power plants to thermal energy storage could ensure the continued operation of nuclear power plants 
and make their operation more flexible. Duan et al. in a similar paper [10] concluded that in a highly decarbonized system, nuclear 
power will be economically viable in countries with low wind energy potential (Hungary is one of these countries). In his study [11], 
Cepin demonstrated that replacing a nuclear power plant with wind power plants of five times the nuclear capacity causes a reduction 
in the reliability of the electricity system. The above articles demonstrate that, despite the energy policy debates, nuclear power has 
important role to play in future low-emission electricity systems, and that it is essential to examine their effective cooperation with 
renewable energy sources. 

Beyond nuclear energy, grid-scale energy storage will also play a significant role in achieving net-zero emission electricity systems. 
There are a number of technologies for energy storage [12], of which battery storage has been playing an increasingly important role in 
recent  years.  However,  most  of  the  research  on  these  storage  systems  [13,14]  approaches  the  issue  from  a  capacity  expansion 
perspective rather than from the point of view of the market behavior of batteries at hourly resolution. Those that focus on the latter 
have concluded that short-term electricity storage can provide cheap and fast energy supplies to compensate daily fluctuations [15, 
16]. 

In our previous study [17], detailed power system models were developed at the Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
to  analyze  the  future  (2030,  2040)  power  system  of  19  European  countries  using  the  Energy  Scenarios  Simulation  Tool  (ESST) 
developed by the International Atomic Energy Agency. The study has shown that the reference day modelling approaches used for the 
development of the National Energy and Climate Plans of the individual governments cannot describe the electricity system with 
sufficient accuracy, and that system modelling with at least hourly resolution is essential for the development of appropriate strategies 
and the analysis of impacts and consequences. The model used in the study is capable of hourly-resolution simulations, taking into 
account the hourly pattern of consumption and renewable generation, but this modelling environment is not able to model the more 
subtle technical characteristics and constraints that affect cross-border capacity, electricity storage and other factors that limit the 
electricity generation of different power plants. Based on the lessons learned from the previous study, we concluded that more so-
phisticated  electricity  market  models  should  be  used  to  model  low-carbon  electricity  systems  at  the  appropriate  level,  for  which 
purpose we chose the Energy Exemplar’s PLEXOS [18] code. 

The main topic of this paper is the modelling of the Hungarian electricity system together with its neighbors, so it is important to 
review the literature on this topic. Kiss et al. [19] have performed hourly resolution simulations of the Hungarian electricity system 
using EnergyPRO [20] software, which was used to study 3 power plant portfolios. Their results show that the portfolio chosen by the 
authors would have a higher fuel diversification, a higher share of renewables, lower emissions, but much higher costs. Campos et al. 
[21] built 2033 models of the Hungarian electricity system using EnergyPLAN software and examined the compatibility of wind and 
solar with projections of future electricity demand in Hungary, and estimated the excess generation. In their study, they found that 46 
% of electricity consumption could be produced by wind and solar PV technology, with less than 5 % of annual overproduction. It 
should be noted that the models presented in the [19,21] studies are not able to model the detailed technological parameters of 
cross-border capacities and neighboring countries, power plants, and the hourly inputs of renewable energy sources are only based on a 
few years of data, so it can be stated that the model presented in this study has a much higher resolution and gives a much more 
detailed picture of the possible future of Hungary’s electricity system compared to these models. 

Based on the literature study, it can be concluded that our present paper is the first to model the combined electricity system of 
Hungary and its neighboring countries with a high time resolution, describing the elements of the electricity system in great detail, and 
to use the model to assess the situation of nuclear, renewables and grid-scale battery storage in the Hungarian electricity system. The 
main contribution of the research presented in this paper to the results in the literature in this field is as follows:  

-  a model is proposed for the Hungarian and neighboring countries’ electricity systems in year 2030 in the PLEXOS to perform hourly 

-  guidance and extensive literature study is provided on the technical and economic parameters of power plants and electricity 

resolution simulations,  

storage units,  

-  results of the impact of new nuclear units are given, 

Heliyon10(2024)e298412