Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Energy and Climate Change 

journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/energy-and-climate-change 

Using electrolytic hydrogen production and energy storage for balancing a 
low carbon electricity grid: Scenario assessments for India 

Rupsha Bhattacharyya a,b, *, KK Singh a, b, K Bhanja b, RB Grover a 
a Applied Systems Analysis, Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI), India 
b Chemical Engineering Group, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), India   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Battery storage system 
Demand management 
Fuel cells 
Hydrogen 
Water electrolysers 

Nuclear reactors and variable renewables will play a significant role in the global energy transition as providers 
of low carbon electricity to various end use sectors. Real time balancing of power demand and supply without 
modulation or curtailment is possible using electrolytic hydrogen plants and energy storage systems. The gen-
eration mix adopted and load profiles are unique to a country and this study considers the specific case of India. 
This work analyses the use of grid connected water electrolysers, grid scale battery storage, hydrogen storage and 
fuel cells as flexible loads and dispatch schemes for grid balancing. Based on postulated long term power gen-
eration  scenarios  for  India,  the  minimum  required  system  sizes  for  grid  balancing  are  estimated  and  techno- 
economic uncertainties are assessed. The use of water electrolysers is prioritized to make use of excess power, 
while minimizing battery storage requirement. This scheme can potentially produce a substantial share of low 
carbon hydrogen in India for use in industrial decarbonization, thus reducing the need for additional generation 
infrastructure.   

1. Introduction 

The global low carbon energy transition for climate change mitiga-
tion will require extensive clean electrification of fossil fuel dependent 
sectors  like  transportation  and  building  energy  systems.  Industrial 
decarbonization will need carbon free energy carriers/raw materials like 
hydrogen and its derivatives, many of which will be produced by elec-
trochemical routes. To cater to all-round increased electricity demand, 
particularly in rapidly developing nations and emerging markets such as 
India,  all  available  low  carbon  electricity  generation  technologies 
including  renewables  and  nuclear  will  need  to  be  harnessed  and 
deployed in an optimal configuration, depending on the projected en-
ergy  needs,  growth  trajectories,  resource  availability,  reliability  of 
supply, and economic considerations [1]. 

At  present,  the  route  adopted  by  most  nations  including  India  to-
wards meeting these objectives is deploying variable renewables (VREs) 
such as solar PV and wind farms and integrating them into their national 
grids. The deployment of large shares of renewables in the electricity 
generation mix creates significant diurnal variation in the output power 
dispatched through the grid due to inherent intermittency. This leads to 
periods when generation exceeds demand or vice versa, requiring load 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: rupsha@barc.gov.in (R. Bhattacharyya).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egycc.2024.100131    

management or backup generators (often fossil fired) to be brought on 
line. Under net zero scenarios involving phase out of fossil-based gen-
eration, the role of nuclear power plants is likely to become extremely 
important, as baseload generators providing reliability and grid stability 
[2–5]. Several studies have also established that the least system-level 
cost  of  electricity  supply  with  a  high  degree  of  reliability  would 
benefit  from  having  a  significant  contribution  from  nuclear  reactors 
alongside  variable  renewables  [6].  A  low  carbon  energy  mix  should 
ideally consist of nuclear, renewables, fossil fuels with carbon capture, 
production and storage of hydrogen and use of hydrogen and captured 
carbon. Therefore, looking at electricity storage as the only solution for 
balancing supply and demand is not a cost-effective approach. One has 
to integrate hydrogen generation with the system in a manner that en-
ables  baseload  operation  of  fossil  and  nuclear  power  plants,  avoids 
curtailment of renewable generators, leads to production of hydrogen, 
and minimizes storage capacity needs. 

1.1. Dispatchable loads for electric power grids 

Energy conversion and storage technologies are expected to have a 
substantial role in providing flexibility and other ancillary services to-
wards stable grid performance in low carbon electricity systems. Both 

EnergyandClimateChange5(2024)100131Availableonline28March20242666-2787/©2024ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.R. Bhattacharyya et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Nomenclature 

BESm 
BES(t) 
CAC 

Battery storage capacity installed, MWh(e) 
Energy stored in battery at time t, MWh(e) 
Cost of avoiding curtailment of one unit of electricity, 
$/kWh(e) 

CapexDM Annualized capital cost of hardware deployed for demand 

management, $/y 
Total capital cost of installed battery storage system, $ 
Cbattery 
Carbon capture, utilization, and storage 
CCUS 
CFC 
Total capital cost of installed fuel cell, $ 
CH2 
Total capital cost of installed water electrolyser, $ 
CPR 
Cost per unit of power ramp up capacity, $/kWh(e) 
CRF 
Capital recovery factor, dimensionless 
Csp,battery  Specific capital cost of battery storage, $/kWh(e) 
Csp,FC 
Csp,  H2 
Csp,tank 
Ctank 
d 
E 
Ebattery 
Esp,  H2 

Specific capital cost of fuel cell, $/kWh(e) 
Specific capital cost of electrolyser plant, $/kW(e) 
Specific capital cost of hydrogen storage tank, $/kg H2 
Total capital cost of installed hydrogen storage tank, $ 
Discount rate per annum, fraction 
Electrolyser rated capacity, MW(e) 
Electrical energy stored in battery, MWh(e) 
Specific energy consumption of electrolyser plant, kWh(e)/ 
Nm3 H2 
Fuel cell stack installed capacity, MW(e) 
Lower heating value of hydrogen, MJ/kg H2 (= 120 MJ/kg 

FCm 
LHV 

n 
pi 

PE(t) 

H2) 
Life time of a given component, y 
Fraction of electrical energy generated by generator i, 
dimensionless 
Power input to electrolyser under part load operation, MW 
(e) 
Input power to water electrolyser, MW(e) 
Electrolyser installed capacity, MW(e) 
Excess electric power available at time t, MW(e) 
Shannon-Wiener Index, dimensionless 
Power demand at time t, MW(e) 
Hydrogen production rate at time t, Nm3/h 
Total hydrogen produced in a day, Nm3 
Residual power at time t sent to battery storage, MW(e) 
Time of day, h 

PH2 
Pm 
SP(t) 
SW 
Pt 
q(t) 
Q 
R(t) 
t 
Tramp,battery Time of discharge of fully charged battery, h 
Tramp,FC  Time of power discharge of hydrogen storage + fuel cell 

system, h 
VRE 
Variable Renewable Energy 
Vstorage  Hydrogen storage tank installed, Nm3 
Δt 
ηFC 

Time interval, h 
Efficiency of fuel cell (hydrogen to electricity conversion), 
dimensionless 
Round trip efficiency of the battery system, dimensionless 
Hydrogen gas density, kg/m3  

ηRT 
ρH2 

short and long duration energy storage and associated technologies are 
required  to  provide  several  grid  services  over  different  time  scales, 
ranging from fraction of a second to hours, extending to days or weeks 
[7]. 

Among well proven and mature alternatives currently available, grid 
scale batteries and grid connected water electrolysers are two mature 
alternatives. While battery storage systems currently have higher round 
trip energy efficiency than a power-to-hydrogen-to-power arrangement, 
batteries are suitable for shorter duration energy storage (typically 2 to 6 
h). The power-to-hydrogen route enables longer duration storage, as it is 
possible to store hydrogen without losses over substantially longer du-
rations [8]. The hydrogen can be used for industrial applications or can 
be re-converted to electricity when renewables might not be available 
for a duration beyond what has been planned for in the design of storage 
capacity. Producing hydrogen when electricity supply exceeds demand 
not only avoids curtailment or power ramp downs, but also contributes 
to meeting the requirement for hydrogen in industrial sectors. Setting up 
additional  renewable  generation  capacity  dedicated  exclusively  to 
hydrogen production may not be the most feasible option in India and 
elsewhere and hence this needs reconsideration. 

Lithium-ion batteries represent grid scale energy storage technolo-
gies that can store excess power available from the grid. With the current 
grid scale battery chemistries commercially available, they can provide 
high discharge  rates (thereby  making them better  suited for  ramp up 
services) but there are constraints on their charging rates, depending on 
instantaneous  state  of  charge  (SOC).  This  can  impact  their  ability  to 
absorb excess power at all rates as well as their degradation rates and 
overall useful lives. Various redox flow batteries have also been devel-
oped  and  commercial  scale  demonstration  projects  have  also  been 
initiated in several countries. Even though their round-trip efficiencies 
are somewhat lower, they are much less dependent on critical minerals 
and are intended to be used for longer duration storage (6 to 11 h) than 
is currently achievable with lithium-ion batteries [9,10]. 

Water  electrolysers  (coupled  with  hydrogen  storage  and  fuel  cell 
systems)  have  also  been  proposed  as  flexible  loads.  Hovsapian  [11] 
presents a list of grid services that water electrolysers can potentially 

provide through their dynamic operation and extremely fast responses 
to  changes  in  input  power.  Tuinema  et  al.  [12]  have  studied  the  po-
tential  for  using  grid  scale  electrolyser  systems  for  frequency  control 
applications. Using a 1 MW(e) PEM electrolyser stack, their field tests 
demonstrate very high ramp up rates between 0.2 MW/s (during system 
start up) and 0.5 MW/s (during normal operation) and ramp down rates 
of 0.4 MW/s. The overall dynamic response is found to be controlled by 
the  power  electronic  components  and  the  AC-DC  power  conversion 
system. They estimate that larger electrolyser plants containing multiple 
electrolysis modules will be capable of sustaining similar overall ramp 
rates  in  proportion  to  their  total  capacities.  Varela  et  al.  [13]  have 
developed an optimal scheduling model for flexible operation of alkaline 
water electrolysers, considering various operational states and practical 
constraints  for  dynamic  operation  such  as  ramp  rates  and  operating 
power range. They provide estimates of the optimal sizes and number of 
electrolysers  to  be  deployed  to  manage  variable  power  inputs  from 
renewable generators. Zenith et al. [14] consider the diversion of excess 
wind  and  hydel  power  in  selected  European  countries  towards  water 
electrolysers such that their spare capacity may be used and monetized 
while providing grid balancing services (both up- and down-regulation). 

1.2. The context for India 

In the Indian power sector, there has been rapid renewable capacity 
addition in the last few years in keeping with goals of reducing emissions 
intensity of the economy, but there has been inadequate storage tech-
nology deployment. As a result, for demand-supply matching, conven-
tional coal-fired generators have been forced to operate flexibly (with 
ramp down to about 55 % of the rated output) [15]; this has adversely 
affected the economics of power production by these generators. 

As coal-based generation is phased down in pursuit of net zero tar-
gets by 2070, power balancing mechanisms without the need for output 
modulation from base load nuclear reactors or renewables’ curtailment 
must be established and evaluated. Thus, attention to the role of demand 
side measures (flexible loads and power dispatch schemes) is needed. 
Some of the demand side options that enable demand-supply balancing 

EnergyandClimateChange5(2024)1001312