Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Chemical Engineering Journal 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cej 

Review 

Photocatalytic H2O2  production Systems: Design strategies and 
environmental applications 

Zhong Chen a, b, Ducheng Yao a, b, Chengcheng Chu a, b, Shun Mao a,b, * 
a College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Biomedical Multidisciplinary Innovation Research Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, State Key Laboratory of 
Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, Tongji University, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, China 
b Shanghai Institute of Pollution Control and Ecological Security, Shanghai 200092, China   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Hydrogen peroxide 
Photocatalytic synthesis 
Design strategy 
Fenton reaction 
Disinfection 
Pollutant degradation 

Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is an environmentally friendly versatile oxidant, which has been used in chemical 
industry, medical, energy, and environmental fields. Photocatalytic H2O2  production is a sustainable, safe, and 
green  process;  however,  the  high  recombination  of  electron-hole  pairs,  low visible  light  utilization, and  poor 
product selectivity still limit the practical applications of photocatalytic H2O2  production. Previous reviews on 
photocatalytic H2O2  generation focus more on the photocatalysts but less on the design strategy of the photo-
catalytic systems, which stems from the critical steps involving the photocatalytic process, i.e., light absorption, 
charge  separation,  and  surface  redox  reaction.  From  this  point  of  review,  this  review  article  introduces  the 
strategies for improving the H2O2  production efficiency based on the above three critical processes. Moreover, 
the  environmental  applications of  photocatalytic  H2O2  generation  including  disinfection  and  pollutant degra-
dation are discussed. The challenges and prospects in photocatalytic H2O2  production and its future environ-
mental applications are also envisioned.   

1. Introduction 

Hydrogen  peroxide  (H2O2),  as  one  of  the  100  most  important 
chemicals in the world, has attracted increasing attention since its first 
synthesis by Thenard in 1818 [1]. It has been widely used in chemical 
industry  [2,3],  medical  [4,5],  energy  [6,7],  and  environmental  fields 
[8,9]. H2O2  is  a highly efficient and  green oxidant for environmental 
remediation applications due to its high content of active oxygen and 
safe reaction product (H2O and O2). It is usually used as a supplement of 
oxygen source in the bioremediation of polluted aquifers [10] and as an 
oxidizing agent in advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) [11], which can 
produce •OH through Fenton reaction or under UV radiation [12,13]. 
H2O2  is also used in water disinfection without producing disinfection 
byproducts, which will be generated by using traditional chemical dis-
infectants  such  as  chlorine,  ozone,  chloramines,  and  chlorine  dioxide 
[14,15]. 

At  present,  oxidation  of  anthraquinone  (AQ)  is  the  mainstream 
technology  for  the  industrial  production  of  H2O2.  However,  the  AQ 
oxidation  process  requires  high  energy  input  and  produces  a  large 
amount of wastewater due to the multistep hydrogenation and oxidation 

reactions [1,16]. Direct synthesis of H2O2  from H2 and O2 can be real-
ized  through  catalytic  synthesis  with  noble  metal  catalysts  [17–19]. 
Unfortunately, the high cost, low H2O2 selectivity, and the explosion risk 
of  H2/O2  mixture  in  this  reaction  make  it  hard  to  scale  up  this  tech-
nology  to  industrial  applications  [20,21].  Thus,  an  environmentally 
friendly and safe process for the production of H2O2  is highly desired. 
Photocatalytic H2O2 production driven by solar energy is one of the most 
promising methods, which only needs earth-abundant water and oxygen 
as raw materials and renewable sunlight as energy supply. Particularly, 
it can produce  H2O2  on site and on demand, avoiding the risk in the 
production and transport of dangerous concentrated H2O2. 

H2O2, as the unique stable molecule ROS, has a much longer lifetime 
than other ROS in water [22]. Thus, compared with other ROS-based 
photocatalytic  processes,  photocatalytic  H2O2  production  system  can 
promote the inactivation efficiency of bacterial by diffusing and pene-
trating  the  bacterial  membrane  through  the  hydrophilic  porin  [23]. 
Moreover, its oxidation capacity can be further boosted by Fenton or 
Fenton-like  reaction  for  refractory  pollutant  degradation.  The  H2O2 
utilization  and  pollutant  degradation  efficiency  of  the  photocatalytic 
H2O2  generation-based Fenton system was reported to be higher than 

* Corresponding author at: College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Biomedical Multidisciplinary Innovation Research Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, 

State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, Tongji University, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, China. 

E-mail address: shunmao@tongji.edu.cn (S. Mao).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2022.138489 
Received 8 June 2022; Received in revised form 20 July 2022; Accepted 2 August 2022   

ChemicalEngineeringJournal451(2023)138489Availableonline5August20221385-8947/©2022ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.Z. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

those of the traditional Fenton systems [24,25]. 

However, the high recombination of electron-hole pairs, low visible 
light utilization and product selectivity still limit the practical applica-
tions  of  photocatalytic  H2O2  production.  Currently,  commonly  used 
photocatalysts such as TiO2 and g-C3N4 inevitably have these problems 
[26,27].  In  the  past  few  years,  various  strategies  were  proposed  to 
improve the photocatalytic activity of catalysts for H2O2 production and 
many exciting results have been achieved that merit a timely review on 
the  recent  advances  in  photocatalytic  H2O2  production  and  its  envi-
ronmental applications. Previous review articles have summarized the 
development  of  photocatalysts  in  photocatalytic  H2O2  production 
including  carbon  nitride  [28–30],  Au  nanoparticle  (NP)-based  plas-
monic  photocatalysts  [31],  carbon  materials  [32],  inorganic  metal- 
oxides [33]. Other reviews also summarized the various catalysts with 
different  modification  methods  [16]  or  reaction  pathways  [34]  and 
compared  their  application  for  photocatalysis  and  electrochemistry 
[35]. However, those reviews focus more on the photocatalyst but less 
on their design strategy based on the fundamental mechanism and their 
application. 

The  photocatalytic  H2O2  synthesis  process  involves  multiple  steps 
including  light  absorption,  charge  carrier  excitation/trapping/separa-
tion/transfer,  reactant  surface  adsorption,  surface  redox  reaction,  in-
termediate  conversion,  and  product  stabilization/desorption  [36–38]. 
These critical steps intrinsically determine the overall efficiency of H2O2 
generation.  Herein,  we  summarize  the  design  strategies  for  efficient 
photocatalytic  H2O2  production  based  on  the  three  main  processes 
including light absorption, charge separation, and surface redox reac-
tion. Additionally, the applications of photocatalytic H2O2 production in 

environmental  fields  including  disinfection and  pollutant  degradation 
have  been  discussed  and  highlighted.  Finally,  prospects  of  H2O2  pro-
duction in the sustainable environment and outlooks on future research 
directions are given. This review aims to inspire new ideas in the design 
of  high-performance  photocatalytic  systems  for  H2O2  production  and 
broaden its applications in the environmental field. 

2. Fundamental processes of photocatalytic H2O2  production 

As  shown  in  Fig.  1,  the  typical  photocatalytic  H2O2  production 
process  involves  three  main  steps  including  light  absorption,  charge 
separation, and surface redox reaction. Firstly, the photocatalysts absorb 
photons under light illumination, and electrons are excited from the VB 
to the CB when the energy is greater than the bandgap (Eg). In the second 
step, the electron and hole pairs will separate and migrate, but most of 
them will recombine and only a few can transfer to the surface of the 
photocatalyst. Finally, the separated electrons and holes participate in 
the surface redox reactions mainly including oxygen reduction reaction 
(ORR) and water oxidation reaction (WOR) to produce H2O2. 

The  reaction  potentials  of  the  corresponding  ORR  and  WOR  are 
(cid:0)
shown in Fig. 1. The ORR can be classified as 2e
ORR (including in-
(cid:0)
direct (I and IV) and indirect (II) pathway) and 4e
ORR pathway (III) 
according to the electron transfer number and reaction intermediates. 
(cid:0)
The  CB  of  photocatalyst  for  H2O2  production  through  the  2e
ORR 
pathway  must  be  more  negative  than  0.68  V.  It  is  thermodynamic 
(cid:0)
ORR when the CB is between + 0.68 V and 
forbidden for indirect 2e
(cid:0)
(cid:0) 0.33 V. The direct and indirect 2e
ORR usually coexist when the CB is 
(cid:0)
more negative than (cid:0) 0.33 V. The direct 2e
ORR with more positive 

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic illustration of the three fundamental processes in photocatalytic H2O2  production. (b) The topic map of this review.  

ChemicalEngineeringJournal451(2023)1384892