Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Sustainable Materials and Technologies 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/susmat 

A review on global warming potential, challenges and opportunities of 
renewable hydrogen production technologies 

Hannah Hyunah Cho *, Vladimir Strezov , Tim J. Evans 

School of Natural Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, NSW 2109, Australia   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Global warming impact 
Renewable hydrogen production 
Wind electrolysis 
Solar PV electrolysis 
Biomass gasification 
Biogas reforming 

This review compares global warming potential of renewable hydrogen production technologies including wind- 
and  solar  PV-powered  water  electrolysis,  biomass  gasification  and  biogas  reforming  based  on  64  hydrogen 
production cases compiled from the literature. Unlike many previous studies, this review discusses the cases from 
various countries, while selecting the production technologies that have potential of commercialisation. Among 
the four reviewed technologies, wind electrolysis performed the best in global warming impacts (1.29 kg CO2 eq/ 
kg  H2),  whereas  biogas  reforming  technology  performed  the  worst  (3.61  kg  CO2  eq/kg  H2).  Key  factors  that 
contributed to most of the impacts were found to be materials used for construction of wind- and solar- electricity 
generation system for both wind- and solar PV-powered electrolysis, and energy consumption during gasification 
processes for biomass gasification, while methane leakage during biogas production had the highest contribution 
to the impacts of biogas reforming cases. On average, the renewable hydrogen cases demonstrated 68–92% lower 
global  warming  potential  when  compared  to  conventional  coal  gasification  and  natural  gas  steam  methane 
reforming systems. Increasing demand for renewable hydrogen and possibility of hydrogen being integrated into 
existing natural gas networks highlight the important role of renewable hydrogen production in the future.   

1. Introduction 

From the introduction of Kyoto Protocol in 1997 to the recent United 
Nations (UN) Climate Change Conference of the Parties (COP26), efforts 
to  mitigate  greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emissions  have  been  witnessed  in 
various industrial sectors, especially in the energy sector with increasing 
demand  for  clean  energy  production  [1,2].  Among  a  range  of  clean 
energy options, renewable hydrogen is gaining increasing attention as a 
low-carbon energy carrier [3] which does not emit GHG emissions when 
used  for  energy  generation  [4].  Hydrogen  has  potential  as  an  energy 
source to replace current use of natural gas (e.g., heat supply to industry 
and replacement of transport fuels) [5] with numerous advantages, such 
as flexibility of feedstock selection (e.g., from fossil fuel sources to waste 
materials)  [6],  marginal  energy  loss  during  transmission  and  wide 
applicability  to  fuel  cells  and  various  industrial  sectors  [1,7].  Once 
hydrogen  is  compressed  to  a  desired  pressure,  it  can  be  distributed 
through  existing  natural  gas  pipelines  with  minor  technological 

modifications  [1].  Currently,  hydrogen  is  demanded  from  various  in-
dustrial sectors, including oil refining (33%), ammonia manufacturing 
(27%), methanol production (11%) and steel production (3%), [8] with 
anticipated demand increase by almost sixfold in 2050, mostly driven by 
increasing demand from the steel and ammonia industries (Fig. 1-a and 
1-b) [9,10]. 

Hydrogen can be produced from both renewable and non-renewable 
sources (see Fig. 2). Nevertheless, global hydrogen production in 2020 
almost entirely relied on fossil fuel sources with only 0.7% was produced 
from natural gas with carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) out 
of the total production of 90 Mt. (million tonnes) (Fig. 1-b) [11]. Despite 
the  impressive  increase  in  the  low-emission  hydrogen  production  in 
2021 (almost 20% increase compared to 2020, including hydrogen from 
natural gas with CCUS and water electrolysis), it still comprised a mere 
fraction of total production, with only 1 Mt. of low-emission production 
out of 94 Mt. of global hydrogen production in 2021, while natural gas 
remained as the major source of hydrogen production, which resulted in 

Abbreviations: AD, Anaerobic digestion; ATR, Auto thermal reforming; BG-reform, Biogas reforming; BMG, Biomass gasification; CCS, Carbon capture and storage; 
CCUS, carbon capture, utilisation and storage; CG, Coal gasification; GHG, Greenhouse gas; GWP, Global warming potential; LCA, Life cycle assessment; PEM, Proton 
exchange membrane; POX, Partial oxidation; PV, Solar photovoltaic; PV-elec, Solar PV-powered electrolysis; SCWG, Supercritical water gasification; SMR, Steam 
methane reforming; SOEC, Solid oxide electrolysis cells; SR, Steam reforming; W-elec, Wind-powered electrolysis. 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail addresses: hannah-hyunah.cho@hdr.mq.edu.au (H.H. Cho), vladimir.strezov@mq.edu.au (V. Strezov), tim.evans@riotinto.com (T.J. Evans).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.susmat.2023.e00567 
Received 18 October 2022; Received in revised form 6 January 2023; Accepted 7 January 2023   

SustainableMaterialsandTechnologies35(2023)e00567Availableonline10January20232214-9937/©2023ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.H.H. Cho et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

630 Mt. of direct CO2  emissions (7% of emissions from industrial sec-
tors) from the fossil-based hydrogen production in 2021 [12]. In order to 
minimise the emissions from hydrogen production, replacing natural gas 
with  renewable  sources  is  essential  [13].  Various  low-emission 
hydrogen  production  technologies  are  available,  including  fore-
mentioned  water  electrolysis,  biomass  gasification  and  fossil-based 
production  with  CCUS  [11],  which  have  been  discussed  in  several 
countries as future energy options. For instance, Japan has announced 
their plans to produce hydrogen using only renewable electricity, while 
US intends to increase hydrogen production from biomass gasification 
[14]. As of 2018, around 70 ongoing projects, mostly in Germany, have 
been identified as renewable-sourced hydrogen production [15]. How-
ever, these low-emission technologies only share about 1% of the cur-
rent global hydrogen production [12]. 

One  possible  reason  that  hinders  expansion  of  the  low-emission 
hydrogen could be high production cost. Levelised production cost of 
natural gas-based hydrogen ranges between US$ 0.5/kg H2 to $ 1.7/ kg 
H2, which could be doubled (up to 4 times) when CCUS is applied [11]. 
Although the cost of water electrolysis is greatly affected by the cost of 
electricity [16], the average production cost of renewable water elec-
trolysis  is  currently  about  6–16  times  higher  than  natural  gas-based 
hydrogen [11], with the potential cost reductions to US$ 1.3–2.4/ kg 
H2  for  solar-powered  electrolysis  and  US$  1.1–2.5  /kg  H2  for  wind- 
powered electrolysis in 2030 [17]. Another challenge of low-emission 
hydrogen is lack of infrastructure for stable supply and transmission of 
the  hydrogen  [10].  This  could  be  of  particular  problem  where  large- 
scale  and  long-distance  hydrogen  transmission  is  necessary.  A  study 
by [18] addressed this issue for China where renewable sources avail-
able  for  hydrogen  production  and  gas  supply  networks  are  unevenly 
distributed.  The  study  concluded  that  utilising  existing  natural  gas 
pipelines for inter-province transmission of renewable hydrogen would 
be optimal, while the use of combined natural gas pipelines and dedi-
cated hydrogen pipelines could only be feasible when unit transmission 
cost is reduced to a certain degree. Storage of hydrogen is also consid-
ered  as  challenging.  Liquified  hydrogen  requires  less  storage  volume 
than gaseous hydrogen but energy loss and energy consumption during 
the  liquefying  processes  are  disadvantageous.  Storage  of  gaseous 
hydrogen,  on  the  other  hands,  requires  specifically-designed  storage 
tanks that can withstand high pressure, but materials suitable for the 
tanks  and  infrastructure  for  transporting  the  hydrogen  still  seek  for 
technological and economic advancement [19]. 

The  renewable  electricity-operated  production  system  is  also 
referred  to as green hydrogen, while hydrogen from natural gas with 
CCUS  is  referred  as  blue  hydrogen  with  methane  pyrolysis  is  also 

included in the blue hydrogen in some studies [20]. Methane pyrolysis 
(also known as methane decomposition or methane cracking), one of the 
emerging  technologies  according  to  the  recent  report  by  IEA  [11]  is 
another  fossil-based  production  but it  does  not  create  any  direct CO2 
emissions,  instead  it  enables  carbon  sequestration  by  producing  solid 
carbon as a by-product. Due to its unique production processes, it is also 
referred  as  turquoise  hydrogen  in  some  cases  [21].  Current  primary 
hydrogen  production  technologies,  fossil-based  production  without 
emissions abatement, are classified as grey hydrogen [22], although this 
colour coding system does not fully interpret the life cycle impacts of 
various  hydrogen  production  processes  [3].  Green  hydrogen  is  often 
considered  as  the  cleanest  [23],  but  when  emissions  during  certain 
production stage is considered (e.g., manufacture of solar cells, for de-
tails see Section 3.2. and Table 3), it is not carbon emission free. While 
some studies use different colour codes interchangeably (for example, 
hydrogen production by coal gasification is classified as grey hydrogen 
[22] but in some studies, it is classified as brown hydrogen [21]), China, 
the world's largest hydrogen producer, established standard for defining 
grey,  low-carbon,  clean  and  green  hydrogen  by  setting  up  emission 
threshold for each production pathway [24]. Based on the GHG emission 
from  coal  gasification  (29.02  kg  CO2  eq/kg  H2),  which  is  the  major 
production pathway in China (about 63% of total production in 2020), 
emissions threshold of low-carbon and clean hydrogen is set at 14.51 kg 
CO2  eq/kg  H2  and  4.9  kg  CO2  eq/kg  H2,  respectively,  while  green 
hydrogen has the threshold below 4.9 kg CO2 eq/kg H2 [24]. 

Theoretically, all wind and solar energy could be used to produce 
hydrogen,  but  when  technical  constraints  (e.g.,  land  availability  and 
collectable energy based  on current technologies)  are  considered, the 
usable amount of those energy sources could be reduced. From an eco-
nomic perspective, this amount could be further reduced due to the high 
production cost, which makes clean hydrogen less competitive in energy 
market [17]. Based on the anticipated cost reduction in clean hydrogen 
production as well as significant increase in the capacity of electrolyser, 
the production of green and blue hydrogen is estimated to reach 61.7 Mt. 
and 33 Mt. out of total production of 180 Mt. in 2030, respectively (see 
Fig. 1-b) [25], while global hydrogen production will almost entirely be 
produced  from  renewable  sources  by  2050,  with  more  than  60%  as 
green hydrogen and around 40% as blue hydrogen [10]. 

Low-emission  hydrogen  production  technologies  include  electro-
chemical (e.g., biofuel-powered water electrolysis), thermochemical (e. 
g., water splitting using solar thermal energy) and biological processes 
(e.g. fermentation of biomass) [13,26], but many of these technologies 
have not yet been commercially produced due to low production effi-
ciency,  high  production  cost, and  lack of  production  and  distribution 

Fig. 1. Current and future hydrogen demand and production; (a) Industrial profiles of hydrogen demand in 2015 and 2050; (b) Current and projected hydrogen 
production technologies. 
* Reproduced based on [10–12,14,16,25]. 

SustainableMaterialsandTechnologies35(2023)e005672(a)(b)01002003004005006002020202120302050Total hydrogen production (Mt/year)YearNatural gas without CCUSCoalOilNatural gas with CCUSWater electrolysisBy-product from refineryBiomass0204060801002015%OthersMetal processingRefiningChemicals0204060801002050%ShippingTransportChemicalsSteel processing