Review
A Prompt Decarbonization Pathway for Shipping: Green
Hydrogen, Ammonia, and Methanol Production and Utilization
in Marine Engines

Jie Shi 1, Yuanqing Zhu 1,*

, Yongming Feng 1

, Jun Yang 2 and Chong Xia 1

1 College of Power and Energy Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
2 Weichai Power Co., Ltd., Weifang 261001, China
* Correspondence: zhuyuanqing@hrbeu.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-151-2451-1231; Fax: +86-451-8256-8384

Abstract: The shipping industry has reached a higher level of maturity in terms of its knowledge
and awareness of decarbonization challenges. Carbon-free or carbon-neutralized green fuel, such
as green hydrogen, green ammonia, and green methanol, are being widely discussed. However,
little attention has paid to the green fuel pathway from renewable energy to shipping. This paper,
therefore, provides a review of the production methods for green power (green hydrogen, green
ammonia, and green methanol) and analyzes the potential of green fuel for application to shipping.
The review shows that the potential production methods for green hydrogen, green ammonia, and
green methanol for the shipping industry are (1) hydrogen production from seawater electrolysis
using green power; (2) ammonia production from green hydrogen + Haber–Bosch process; and
(3) methanol production from CO2 using green power. While the future of green fuel is bright, in
the short term, the costs are expected to be higher than conventional fuel. Our recommendations
are therefore as follows: improve green power production technology to reduce the production cost;
develop electrochemical fuel production technology to increase the efﬁciency of green fuel production;
and explore new technology. Strengthening the research and development of renewable energy and
green fuel production technology and expanding fuel production capacity to ensure an adequate
supply of low- and zero-emission marine fuel are important factors to achieve carbon reduction
in shipping.

Keywords: green hydrogen; green ammonia; green methanol; green power; ship carbon emission
reduction

1. Introduction

Marine engines mainly use low-quality fuel with high sulfur content, high viscosity,
and heavy metals, such as cadmium, vanadium, and lead. The complexity of low-quality
fuel components leads to more exhaust pollutants from ships. The substances represented
by nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides (SOx), particulate matter (PM), and carbon dioxide
(CO2) have a great impact on human health, the environment, and the climate [1]. After-
treatment technology is often used to purify exhaust gas, such as selective catalytic reduc-
tion (SCR) technology or exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) technology to purify NOx [2–5],
exhaust gas cleaning (EGC) technology to purify SOx [6], and carbon capture technology
to purify CO2 [7]. In 2018, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) adopted a
preliminary strategy for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from ships, proposing
to reduce carbon emissions in the global shipping industry 50% by 2050 (based on carbon
emissions in 2008) and to achieve zero carbon emissions in the global shipping industry
in the 21st century [8]. Dong et.al. [9] reviewed the decarbonization laws and policies
introduced by the IMO, by the European Union, and at the national levels. More ambitious
emission control efforts are needed to achieve the climate goals.

Citation: Shi, J.; Zhu, Y.; Feng, Y.;

Yang, J.; Xia, C. A Prompt

Decarbonization Pathway for

Shipping: Green Hydrogen,

Ammonia, and Methanol Production

and Utilization in Marine Engines.

Atmosphere 2023, 14, 584. https://

doi.org/10.3390/atmos14030584

Academic Editor: László Bencs

Received: 26 January 2023

Revised: 11 March 2023

Accepted: 13 March 2023

Published: 17 March 2023

Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Atmosphere 2023, 14, 584. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos14030584

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/atmosphere

atmosphereAtmosphere 2023, 14, 584

2 of 29

From the perspective of energy technology, since fossil fuel are used, internal com-
bustion engines inevitably emit a large amount of CO2. It is difﬁcult to achieve carbon
emission reduction development strategies and goals by relying solely on existing energy
efﬁciency improvement methods [10]. The maritime industry is paying increasing attention
to the development and application of low-carbon marine fuel. Wang et al. [11] summa-
rized and analyzed the use potential of low-carbon alternative fuel for ships. At present,
the alternative fuels available for ships include liqueﬁed natural gas, liqueﬁed petroleum
gas, methanol, biodiesel, hydrogen, and ammonia. In the short term, liqueﬁed natural
gas, liqueﬁed petroleum gas, and methanol technologies are relatively mature and can be
applied to shipping. In the long run, biodiesel, hydrogen, and ammonia will inevitably
become the mainstream alternative fuels for ships. Among these, ammonia, hydrogen, and
methanol are the most investigated alternative marine fuels. If renewable resources are
used for production, low or zero emissions can be achieved, creating what is called green
fuel. Ammonia, hydrogen, and methanol are at different stages of development, as shown
in Table 1. If produced from fossil fuel, hydrogen and ammonia are not clean compared to
marine gas oil (MGO) when assessed over the entire life cycle.

Table 1. Compared with standard MGO, whole-life-cycle GHG emissions of ammonia, hydrogen,
and methanol [12].

Fuel

Hydrogen
(liquid, −253 ◦C)
Ammonia
(liquid, −33 ◦C)
Methanol

Proportion of GHG over Whole
Life Cycle Compared to MGO
Renewable
Energy

Fossil Fuel

Energy
Density (MJ/L)

166%

140%

101%

0%

6%

1%

8.5
12.7 (−33 ◦C)
10.6 (45 ◦C)
14.9

Emission Reduction Compared to
Conventional Fuel

SOx

100%

100%

100%

NOx

Varies according to
engine design
Potential for more
emissions
30–50%

PM

100%

100%

90%

The shipping industry has high hopes for carbon-free or carbon-neutral green fuel.
The use of carbon-free or carbon-neutral green fuel is an effective way to fundamentally
solve carbon emissions [13,14]. Carbon-free green fuels include green hydrogen and
green ammonia. Carbon-neutral fuels include renewable methanol, renewable natural
gas, bioethanol, bio-dimethyl ether, and biodiesel. Producing green fuel from renewable
energy, especially by converting CO2 into fuel using renewable energy, has attracted great
interest for the following reasons [15–19]: (1) it can achieve large-scale, long-term energy
storage to meet the seasonal, long-distance demand for renewable energy, which becomes
a commodity in international energy trade; (2) the production technology and end-use
technology are mature, and existing fuel distribution infrastructure can be used to meet the
renewable energy needs of transport, mobile devices, and construction machinery; (3) the
whole-life-cycle resource consumption is less, and the understanding of its environmental
impact is clearer, which can reduce the increase of CO2 concentration in the atmosphere
and ocean acidiﬁcation.

Green hydrogen, green ammonia, and green methanol are being widely discussed for
shipping [20]. Because green methanol and ammonia have higher energy densities and
are relatively easier to transport and store on ships, they have become the most promising
near-zero-emission marine fuel for the next decade. In the long run, hydrogen can be a
more advantageous zero-emission solution, and it poses the least potential threat to the
environment when it leaks.

Interest in using renewable energy to reduce carbon emissions from shipping has
in-creased signiﬁcantly in recent years [21]. Although it is possible to achieve carbon
reduction by directly employing renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and wave
energy during a ship’s voyage at sea, their indirect nature means uncertainty regarding
the emission reduction effect, which is undesirable for ship operators. Another pathway is

