Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ccr 

Review 

A review of carbon dots in synthesis strategy 

Huaxin Liu, Xue Zhong, Qing Pan, Yi Zhang, Wentao Deng, Guoqiang Zou, Hongshuai Hou *, 
Xiaobo Ji 

State Key Laboratory of Powder Metallurgy, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Carbon dots 
Carbon quantum dots 
Graphene quantum dots 
Synthesis strategy 
Nanomaterials 

Among the carbon nanomaterials family, the fluorescent carbon dot has emerged as a significant member among 
the novel types of nanomaterials, and many researchers have introduced studies on its properties and potential 
applications. Carbon dots (CDs) have numerous outstanding characteristics, such as remarkable photostability, 
negligible cytotoxicity, exceptional biocompatibility, effortless surface modification, and remarkable chemical 
inertness. As a result, they have found extensive applications in various domains, including but not limited to cell 
imaging, in vivo imaging, drug delivery, fluorescence sensing, photocatalysis, production of polychromatic light 
emitting diodes (LEDs), energy conversion and storage, etc. Recently, many synthesis strategies of carbon dots 
have been developed, but how to synthesize in a controlled way is still challenging. The focus of this article is to 
provide an overview of the advancements made in the production of carbon dots, with particular attention given 
to their synthesis techniques along with some discussion and provide a reference for the controllable synthesis 
and method selection of carbon dots.   

1. Introduction 

Carbon  dot  belongs  to  the  family  of  carbon  nanomaterials  and  is 
regarded as a significant member due to its unique fluorescent proper-
ties. It is worth mentioning that CDs were first discovered by researchers 
accidentally when purifying single-walled carbon nanotubes manufac-
tured by arc discharge method in 2004 [1]. Subsequently, these type of 
new materials were named by Sun et al. in 2006 [2]. In general, CDs 
refer to carbon particles that are finely dispersed and have a size of less 
than  10  nm,  which  are  coated  with  functional  groups  like  hydroxyl, 
amino, carboxyl or aromatic ring. CDs have gained significant attention 
in recent years due to their numerous exceptional properties. Apart from 
possessing  a  high quantum  yield  and  adjustable  emission  wavelength 
like  traditional  semiconductor  quantum  dots,  CDs  exhibit  remarkable 
photostability,  negligible  cytotoxicity,  exceptional  biocompatibility, 
effortless surface modification, and remarkable chemical inertness [3]. 
Based on their fundamental composition, CDs can be classified into four 
categories:  graphene  quantum  dots  (GQDs)  that  have  a  2D  layered 
graphene  core,  carbon  quantum  dots  (CQDs)  with  a  spherical  crystal 
core,  carbon  nanodots (CNDs)  that  have  an  amorphous  core  [4],  and 
carbonized  polymer  dots  (CPDs)  which  possess  a  highly  dehydrated 
crosslinking  polymer  frame  or  a  slightly  graphitized  core  [5,6].  In 
addition to the most basic constituent elements C, H, O, doping elements 

such  as  N,  S,  P  are  usually  introduced  into  CDs.  Fig.  1 illustrates  the 
extensive  utilization  of  CDs  in  various  areas,  including  cell  imaging 
[7–10],  in  vivo  imaging  [5,11],  drug  delivery  [12–15],  fluorescence 
sensing [16–24], photocatalysis [25–29], production of polychromatic 
LEDs [30–33], energy conversion and storage [34–44], etc. As a novel 
type  of  fluorescent  nanomaterial,  CDs  have  exhibited  remarkable 
promise.  However,  the  controllable  synthesis  of  CDs  still  faces  many 
challenges. Since the discovery of CDs, various functional CDs have been 
synthesized  with  diversified  strategies.  This  review  describes  various 
synthetic routes for the production of CDs. Finally, the characteristics of 
each method are summarized. We aim to create a thorough summary of 
the  various  synthesis  strategies  applied  for  CDs  and  offer  a  useful 
reference for those seeking to achieve controllable synthesis and select 
appropriate methods for CDs.Table 1. 

2. Synthesis methods 

Since the discovery of CDs, how to synthesize CDs in a controlled way 
has been the key for scientists to research. According to different carbon 
sources, the synthesis strategies of CDs can be roughly divided into “top- 
down” and “bottom-up” [45,46]. The “top-down” synthesis method in-
volves  the  stripping  process  from larger  carbon  sources,  either physi-
cally or chemically, to create small CDs. Generally, carbon nanotubes 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: hs-hou@csu.edu.cn (H. Hou).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2023.215468 
Received 13 July 2023; Accepted 22 September 2023   

CoordinationChemistryReviews498(2024)215468Availableonline10October20230010-8545/©2023ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

[1,47]. carbon fibres, and graphite rods [2] are used as carbon sources 
for  “top-down”  method.  On  the  contrary,  the  “bottom-up”  synthesis 
method employs small carbon sources under molecular or ionic states to 
synthesize CDs. Most organic small molecules or oligomers include citric 
acid, glucose, polyethylene glycol and urea are taken into consideration. 
Common “top-down” and “bottom-up” methods will be discussed in the 
following sections. 

2.1. “top-down” strategies 

2.1.1. Arc discharge 

The arc discharge process takes place in a low-pressure arc chamber 
filled with inert gas. Powdered carbon precursors are usually made into 
anode  and  the  cathode  is  usually  made  of  pure  graphite.  When  the 
system is working, the precursors are evaporated and consumed. As a 
result, the carbon precursors sublimate and travel towards the cathode, 
where they deposit as nanostructures. CDs were firstly discovered in this 
way. Xu et al. discovered two novel nanomaterials during the purifica-
tion  of  single-walled  carbon  nanotubes  (SWNT)  extracted  from  arc 
discharge soot [1]. These materials were separated from the coarse soot, 
and included short tubular carbon as well as a mixture of fluorescent 
nanoparticles originating from SWNT. Carboxyl functional groups were 
introduced to the arc-treated soot by oxidizing it with 3.3 mol/L HNO3 
to  enhance  the  hydrophilicity  of  the  carbon  material,  and  then  the 

precipitate  was  extracted  using  a  NaOH  solution  and  subsequently 
separated through gel electrophoresis. It was suggested that the sepa-
rated fluorescent carbon and short tubular carbon species were a novel 
carbon material, which was later named CDs. It should be noted that 
while CDs produced through this method exhibit good fluorescence, the 
particle size  distribution is inconsistent  and the yield is exceptionally 
low,  making  it  unsuitable  for  large-scale  manufacturing.  Further 
research suggested that the spacing of the electrodes played a crucial 
role in determining the diameter and quality of the carbon nanotubes 
synthesized [48]. By arranging the magnetic field lines appropriately, 
the motion of the arc and the production process can be enhanced. The 
magnetic field also boosted the growth rate of the deposit and improves 
the purity of the resultant product. This may be a way to improve the 
purity of CDs obtained by arc discharge method. 

2.1.2. Laser ablation method 

Laser ablation involves utilizing a high-energy laser to irradiate the 
material, leading to rapid heating. Laser pulses can generate small pits in 
the sample, consuming the sample and creating plasma flowing through 
the sample surface, thereby ionizing the sample. Early years, a carbon 
target was created by Sun and colleagues through the hot-pressing of a 
combination  of  graphite  powder  and  cement,  followed  by  a  gradual 
process of baking, curing, and annealing in a flow of argon gas [2]. In the 
presence of water, argon was used as carrier gas to ablate carbon target 

Fig. 1. A summary of the synthesis process and potential application of CDs.  

CoordinationChemistryReviews498(2024)2154682