IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, MARCH 2023

2199

Model Predictive Current Control of Nine-Phase
Open-End Winding PMSMs With an Online
Virtual Vector Synthesis Strategy

Haifeng Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Xinzhen Wu , Xiaoqin Zheng , Member, IEEE,
and Xibo Yuan , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The current error is hard to avoid for ﬁnite
control set model predictive current control (FCS-MPCC)
in nine-phase open-end winding permanent magnet syn-
chronous motors. To overcome this problem, an online vir-
tual voltage vector (V3) synthesis strategy is proposed in
this article. First, a group of V3 s without harmonic voltage
components are designed as the basic vectors for online
synthesis. Then, two adjacent basic V3 s and a zero vector
are used to synthesize a new V3, which can output arbi-
trary amplitude and phase angle in the fundamental space.
The two basic V3 s are directly selected from the located
sector of the predicted reference voltage vector (RVV), and
their duration ratio can be simply calculated according to
the angle of the RVV in the sector. In this way, the zero
error is realized between the new V3 and RVV. Moreover,
an online pulse generation algorithm corresponding to the
new V3 is proposed, which can calculate the symmetrical
pulse sequences in real-time for the multiphase OW drive
system without the space vector modulator. Finally, exper-
imental results have veriﬁed the effectiveness and superi-
ority of the proposed strategy, in comparison to existing
FCS-MPCC in multiphase OW motor drive systems.

Index Terms—Model predictive control

(MPC), nine-
phase permanent magnet synchronous motors (PMSM), on-
line synthesis, open-end winding, virtual vector, zero con-
trol error.

I. INTRODUCTION

O WING to a higher dc-link voltage utilization, control

ﬂexibility and fault tolerance, multiphase permanent mag-
net synchronous motors with open-end winding (OW-PMSMs)
have been considered as promising candidates in high-power

Manuscript received 22 February 2022; revised 25 April 2022; ac-
cepted 29 April 2022. Date of publication 17 May 2022; date of current
version 16 November 2022. This work was supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 52037005, Grant
U2106217 and Grant 51907093. (Corresponding author: Xinzhen Wu.)
Haifeng Wang, Xinzhen Wu, and Xiaoqin Zheng are with the College
of Electrical Engineering, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China
(e-mail: 2018010022@qdu.edu.cn; wuxinzhen@qdu.edu.cn; zhengxi-
aoqin@qdu.edu.cn).

Xibo Yuan is with the College of Electrical Engineering, Qingdao
University, Qingdao 266071, China, and also with the Department of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Bristol, BS8 1UB
Bristol, U.K. (e-mail: xibo.yuan@bristol.ac.uk).

Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at

https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2022.3174241.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIE.2022.3174241

high-reliability electric propulsion applications [1]–[3]. In ad-
dition, ﬁnite control set model predictive control (FCS-MPC)
has received great attention in multiphase motor drive systems
thanks to the increasing computational capability of micropro-
cessors [4]. Compared with conventional control strategies, such
as ﬁeld-oriented control and direct torque control, FCS-MPC
has fast dynamic response and it is easy to include nonlinear
constraints [5], [6]. Especially, for multivariable control in mul-
tiphase drives, FCS-MPC can be implemented simply without
adding new controllers [7].

The classic FCS-MPC strategy evaluates all candidate voltage
vectors through the predictive model, and selects the vector
that makes the control variable closest to the reference value.
Thus, the inverter is directly driven by applying the switching
state corresponding to the optimal vector without an external
modulator [8]. Among various kinds of FCS-MPC strategies,
model predictive current control (MPCC) is one of the most
popular and classical solutions in three-phase machine drives
because the weighting factor is intrinsically absent. However, in
multiphase drives, where multiple planes must be regulated at the
same time, the weighting factor must be considered. Meanwhile,
the discrete and single voltage vector output limits the improve-
ment of operation performance. In particular, according to the
extended vector space decomposition (VSD) theory, there are
harmonic subspaces in the multiphase system, which introduces
the low-order harmonic currents that cannot be neglected [9],
[10]. Obviously, using only a single voltage vector during the
whole control period cannot regulate all subspace components
at the same time, and the control error always exists due to the
discretization of voltage vector.

Aiming to eliminate the inﬂuence of voltage vector in har-
monic subspaces, the virtual voltage vector (V3) is proposed
by the means of voltage vector synthesis [11]. In ﬁve- and
six-phase PMSM drives, the V3 is synthesized by two or more
voltage vectors to obtain zero average amplitudes in the har-
monic subspace [12], [13]. For the back electromotive force
(EMF) odd harmonics created by nonsinusoidal ﬂux, Xiong et
al. [14] proposed the method that can simultaneously control
the fundamental plane current and harmonic plane current in the
ﬁve-phase PMSM, so the stator current harmonics can be sup-
pressed effectively. Gonçalves et al. [15] presented a multistage
predictive current control strategy, which contains fundamental
and secondary control stages that are responsible for tracking the
reference currents in both subspaces separately. However, the
ﬁxed amplitude of the V3 deteriorates the steady-state perfor-
mance. In addition, an observer-based predictive vector-resonant

0278-0046 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Adelaide. Downloaded on June 29,2024 at 09:22:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, MARCH 2023

control scheme is proposed in [16] to suppress periodic distur-
bances resulting from converter dead-time effect and rotor ﬂux
harmonics. In order to output the V3 with ﬂexible amplitude,
Xue et al. [17] reported a FCS-MPCC scheme with optimal duty
ratio, which combines the selected V3 and zero vector in each
control cycle. Besides, Saeed et al. [18] proposed a deadbeat
FCS-MPCC with duty ratio. In this method, the deadbeat current
control (DBCC) is introduced to obtain the reference voltage
vector (RVV), and then the optimal V3 is directly selected
according to the located sector of the RVV. It not only improves
the control accuracy with the duty ratio optimization, but also
reduces the computational burden signiﬁcantly. However, the
control sets in the abovementioned methods are composed of
the discrete voltage vectors calculated ofﬂine. Although the
amplitude of the output vector is variable, the error between
the output vector and RVV is still difﬁcult to eliminate.

An effective way to reduce and eliminate the control error is to
dynamically synthesize the V 3 in real time according to the con-
trol requirement [19], [20]. An online vector synthesis scheme is
proposed in [21], which synthesizes multiple vectors in the sec-
tor where the RVV is located, and selects the optimal one as the
output by the cost function. Nevertheless, the synthesized vector
points are limited and unable to cover the whole synchronous
space frame. In [22], a dynamic voltage vectors (DVV) strategy
is proposed further. The V3 are constantly changing to search
for the optimal combination in each control cycle. However, the
vector preselection and amplitude optimization processes are
complicated with an increased computational burden. In [23],
the smart voltage vector (SVV) is synthesized by three vectors
to realize that the output vector covers the whole surface in
α − β plane. However, the selection of three optimal vectors
still requires a lot of online iterative search, and the optimal
dwell time of each vector is searched in 12 discrete values
according to the predeﬁned interval. To remove the control error
in FCS-MPCC, Zhao et al. [24] and Song et al. [25], respectively,
proposed a continued modulation V3 scheme without using
a modulator for ﬁve-phase drive systems. In [24], a cascaded
optimization procedure is introduced to determine the voltage
vectors participating in the synthesis, the phase angle of the
synthesized new V3, and the duty ratio. This optimization strat-
egy requires two duty ratio calculations and two cost function
exploration processes. In [25], the synthesis results of each set
of adjacent V3 s is evaluated, and then, the optimal new V
3 is realized by substituting the precalculated duty ratio into
the dwell time calculation of each leg. Therefore, the repeated
evaluation process cannot be absent. Also, in [26], the modulated
MPC (M2 PC) uses four active vectors to improve further the
steady-state error of the stator currents tracking in d − q plane.
However, the modulation method is not applicable to open-end
winding multiphase motors with H-bridge converters.

In nine-phase OW-PMSM drives, the online V3 synthesis
faces new challenges. First, more harmonic subspaces than ﬁve-
and six-phase drives means that more voltage vectors need to
participate in the synthesis. Then, different from star-connected
motor drives, the synthesized vector is the result of the simul-
taneous action by the dual inverter. Consequently, it is a real
challenge to generate the new pulse sequences online in the
multiphase OW drives without using a space vector modulator,
although some efforts on virtual vector output method have been
made recently for multiphase machines [27]–[29]. Moreover, the
computational burden needs to be further reduced to adapt to the
complexity of the system.

Fig. 1. Schematic of the nine-phase OW-PMSM drive system.

In this article, an online V3 synthesis strategy-based FCS-
MPCC for nine-phase OW-PMSMs is ﬁrst proposed. The ﬁrst
objective is to establish the discrete basic V3 set that can
eliminate the voltage components in the harmonic subspaces.
The second objective is to synthesize a new V3 online using two
adjacent V3 s and a zero vector, so that the output V3 covers any
amplitude and phase angle in the whole fundamental subspace.
The third objective is the online generation of the symmetrical
pulses, namely the corresponding duty ratio of each leg of the
new synthesized V3 in the nine-phase OW drive system. Finally,
the steady-state and dynamic performances of the proposed
strategy are evaluated, in comparison to the existing V3 with
duty ratio optimization-based FCS-MPCC strategy. The main
contributions of this article are as follows.

1) The synthesized new V3 realizes the zero control error
and improves the steady-state performance by 56%.
2) A switching pulse synthesis algorithm is designed for
nine-phase OW drives, which can realize the online gen-
eration of symmetrical pulses.

3) The process of vector selection and duration calculation
does not need any weighting factor and enumeration
process, which reduces the computational burden by 13%.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the nine-phase OW-PMSM system and the current
predictive model. In Section III, the design method of basic V3
is described in detail, which takes into account multiple har-
monic subspaces (3rd, 5th, and 7th order). Section IV proposes
the online V3 synthesis strategy and the corresponding pulse
generation algorithm in the OW drive. Section V veriﬁes the
effectiveness of the proposed FCS-MPCC through experiments.
Finally, Section VI concludes this article.

II. NINE-PHASE OW-PMSM SYSTEM MODELING

The symmetrical nine-phase OW-PMSM drive system with
nine sets of H-bridge converters is shown in Fig. 1. For the
studied PMSM, the shape of the magnets has been optimized to
reduce the harmonics, so the harmonic in the magnetic ﬁeld in
the air-gap is very small (<4%), and the inﬂuence of back-EMF
odd harmonics in the PMSM can be neglected. The switching
state Sx1(x = a, b, . . ., i) is deﬁned as the left leg state of the
H-bridge, and the one with Sx2 is the right leg state of the H-
bridge. Employing the dc-link voltage (Vdc) and the switching

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Adelaide. Downloaded on June 29,2024 at 09:22:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

