Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Process Safety and Environmental Protection 

journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/process-safety-and-environmental-protection 

Highly efficient adsorption and removal bio-staining dye from industrial 
wastewater onto mesoporous Ag-MOFs 

Meshari M. Aljohani a, Salhah D. Al-Qahtani b, Mubark Alshareef c, Mohamed G. El-Desouky d,*, 
Ashraf A. El-Bindary e, Nashwa M. El-Metwaly f, Mohamed A. El-Bindary g 
a Department of Chemistry, College of Science, University of Tabuk, 71474 Tabuk, Saudi Arabia 
b Department of Chemistry, College of Science, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia 
c Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Applied Science, Umm-Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia 
d Egyptian Propylene and Polypropylene Company, Port Said 42511, Egypt 
e Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Damietta University, Damietta 34517, Egypt 
f Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Mansoura University, El-Gomhoria Street, 35516, Egypt 
g Basic Science Department, Higher Institute of Engineering and Technology, Damietta 34517, Egypt   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Ag-MOF 
Batch adsorption 
Isotherm 
Thermodynamics 
Mechanism of interaction 
Box-Behnken design 

Adsorption  is  an  effective  and  promising  approach  for  removing  pollutants  from  wastewater.  Too  many  haz-
ardous colors were unintentionally released into the water, which had a negative impact on the environment. A 
popular textile dye is malachite green (MG). Thus, in this work, an environmentally acceptable inorganic-organic 
Ag metal-organic framework-based technique to remove colors from industrial water was developed (Ag-MOF). 
The sorbent was analyzed in the first section of the work using SEM, XPS, XRD, FT-IR, pHpzc, and BET, which 
confirmed that the Ag-MOF had the BET surface area, is 676 m2/g, which is a significant surface area. In a later 
stage, the sorption properties of the dye were examined along with the effects of pH, sorbent dosage, temper-
ature, and ionic strength; the sorption isotherms and uptake kinetics were examined: As opposed to the kinetic 
profile, Isotherm profiles are well-fit by the Langmuir equation and can be modeled by the pseudo-second order 
rate  equation.  The  outcomes  further  demonstrated  that  MG  was  mostly  adsorbed  onto  Ag-MOF  adsorbent  by 
electrostatic attraction forces, hydrogen bonding, ion exchange, and pore filling. 2.25 mmol/g was found to be 
the  greatest  adsorption  effectiveness  of  MG  onto  Ag-MOF  adsorbent.  (i.e.  809.71  mg/g).  Adsorbent  dosage, 
solution  pH,  temperature,  and  time  were  the  four  adsorption  process  parameters  that  were  tuned  using  Box- 
Behnken  design  (BBD)  in  response  surface  methodology  (RSM).  The  (ΔH
)  MG  dye  was 
endothermically and spontaneously extracted using Ag-MOF as an adsorbent, according to the specifications. Up 
to  five  cycles  of  adsorption-desorption,  the  synthesised  Ag-MOF  adsorbent  demonstrates  exceptional  render 
ability and cyclability. The produced adsorbent’s efficacy for purifying wastewater samples at a laboratory scale 
was assessed as a proof of concept. Study the mechanism of interaction between the Ag-MOF and MG as it could 
be take place through π-π  interaction, pore filling, H-Bonding or electrostatic interaction. The mesoporous Ag- 
MOF  adsorbent  offered  a  simple  and  effective  way  to  handle  water  filtering  and  industrial  wastewater  man-
agement. According to our research, this work is the first to explain how to remove MG dye from wastewater 
samples using Ag-MOF adsorbents.   

),  and  (ΔG

◦
),  (ΔS

◦

◦

1. Introduction 

Recent  years  have  seen  an  increase  in  the  focus  on  sustainable 
resource  development  among  planners,  environmental  scientists,  and 
decision-makers.  Water  is  the  most  important  renewable  natural 
resource among them due to the fact that it is both an essential part of 

life and a key enabler. The majority of the world’s drinking water comes 
from groundwater. Over 1.5 billion people throughout the world receive 
their drinking water from groundwater, which also supplies about 43 % 
of  all  irrigation  needs  (Garg  et  al.,  2019).  Groundwater  quality  and 
quantity have declined as a result of rising industrialization, the rapid 
population growth, and unrestricted freshwater use. Per the statistics, 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail addresses: mohamed.eldesoky@EPP-EG.com, ch.moh.gamal@gmail.com (M.G. El-Desouky).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2023.02.036 
Received 5 November 2022; Received in revised form 11 February 2023; Accepted 13 February 2023   

ProcessSafetyandEnvironmentalProtection172(2023)395–407Availableonline17February20230957-5820/©2023InstitutionofChemicalEngineers.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.M.M. Aljohani et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

1.2 billion people worldwide lack access to clean water, and 663 million 
people  suffer  from  contaminated  water  (Rashid  et  al.,  2019).  Water 
discharged into the ecosystem that has either not been cleaned at all or 
has only been partially treated causes the majority of surface water and 
groundwater pollution. Particularly, organic dyes from industrial wastes 
such as paper, solar cells, leather, plastics, and textiles seriously harm 
the  environment  and  people’s  health  (Amarasooriya  and  Kawakami, 
2019). 

Humans  have  contaminated  a  limited  number  of  freshwater  re-
sources.  The  discharge  water  containing  dyes  is  one  of  the  pollution 
sources. Dyes are employed as colourants in the manufacturing process 
in  a  variety  of  industries,  includes  those  in  the  food  production,  cos-
metics, automotive, pharmaceutical, plastics, paint, leather, and textile 
industries. Each year, these companies create more than 7 × 105 tons of 
dyes and almost 10,000 different types. Even at low concentrations (1 
mg/L), dyes are visible to the human eye. Dye contains hazardous ele-
ments  that  harm  aquatic  life,  natural  life,  and  human  life,  as  well  as 
upset the ecological equilibrium. These industrial discharges are highly 
colored  and  have  high  chemical  (COD)  and  biochemical  oxygen  de-
mands (BOD) (Lee et al., 1999). Dye types include anionic, cationic, and 
dispersion  dyes.  Anionic  dyes  are  divided  into  three  subcategories: 
reactive, direct, and acid dyes. Basic dyes are another name for cationic 
dyes. Disperse dyes are not ionic (Gu et al., 2013). The release of dyes 
has detrimental effects on ecosystems, human health, soil fertility, and 
marine  life  since  they  are  genotoxic,  mutagenic,  and  carcinogenic. 
Diverse  techniques are  used to treat dye  wastewater, including mem-
brane  separation  procedures,  degradation,  flocculation,  precipitation, 
and  oxidation.  While  these  techniques  are  effective  in  removing  dye, 
they  are  costly  for  developing  nations  to  implement  on  a  wide  scale 
(Islam and Mostafa, 2018; Gao et al., 2011; Agarwal and Singh, 2017). 
The adsorption technique is commonly used to remove colours because 
of  its  great  efficacy  and  ease  of  use.  Adsorbents  used  in  wastewater 
treatment,  including  activated  carbon,  silica  gel,  MOF,  activated 
alumina, and others, are expensive and need a challenging regeneration 
process.  This  has  made  it  possible  to  search  for  novel,  simple,  and 
affordable adsorbents with outstanding dye percentage removal (Celik 
et al., 2021). 

Malachite green (MG), C23H25N2, is a cationic dye with numerous 
commercial and industrial uses, including disinfection in medicine and 
the treatment of fungal and protozoal infections, particularly in aqua-
culture (Sallam et al., 2018; El-Subruiti et al., 2019). The food business 
uses MG as a coloring and additive, The industries that use it as a dyeing 
agent include those that work with leather, silk, wool, cotton, paper, and 
acrylic. In these businesses, one of the biggest issues is getting MG dye 
out of the environment (Agarwal and Singh, 2017; Royer et al., 2009; 
Abdolali et al., 2014). The number of dyes released into waterways has 
increased  due  to  the  strong  demand  for  vibrant  hues.  Infertility,  pul-
monary toxicity, and teratogenic consequences from MG exposure are 
all possible side effects. To avoid unnecessary exposure, it is crucial to 
remove MG dye from water (Mahmoodi, 2013). The dye’s complicated 
chemical  makeup,  great  resilience  to  oxidising  chemicals,  and  low 
chemical and biological precipitation efficacy for this sort of molecule 
make  cleaning  difficult.  As  a  result,  it  is  recommended  that  creating 
techniques  for  depolarization  from  aquatic  sources  is  a  worthwhile 
research area (Adebayo et al., 2014). 

In the literature, various techniques for wastewater purification have 
been  published.  Due  to  its  environmental  friendliness  and  the  afford-
ability of traditional adsorbents, The removal of organic contaminants 
from  water  via  adsorption  has  been  found  to  be  more  successful 
(Nanotube et al., 2013). However, these materials have a low adsorption 
capacity as well, necessitating the urgent need for additional adsorbents 
with high removal capacities. 

Numerous  promising  nanomaterials,  particularly  metal-organic 
frameworks,  have  been  the  subject  of  recent  research  (MOFs),  to 
detect and remove harmful metals and organic dyes from the environ-
ment. The superior porosity, vast surface area, and organized structure 

of MOFs have been linked to the latter’s high removal % of harmful dyes 
and  metals.  As  a  result,  MOFs  outperform  traditional  materials  in 
detecting  and  eliminating  harmful  heavy  metals  and  organic  dyes. 
Different MOFs with tremendous morphology can be created thanks to 
the interaction between linker subunits and inorganic metals. In general, 
the  usage  of  MOFs for  sensing  and  eliminating  contaminants  benefits 
from the vast availability of different particular linkers. Because of their 
stability and improved textural properties, Ag imidazolate frameworks 
are typically regarded as promising adsorbent materials in order to get 
rid of organic dyes (Li et al., 2017; El-Sewify et al., 2022). 

The  bigger  surface-to-volume  ratio  of  the  smaller  silver  nano-
particles,  which  results  in  a  larger  area  of  contact  between  both  the 
nanoparticles and bacteria, has been investigated in the literature as the 
reason why smaller silver nanoparticles are much more active than those 
made of larger size. Smaller Ag-MOF naturally releases more silver ions 
into the environment than larger ones, which effectively inhibits bac-
terial development. It was discovered that when Ag-MOF are combined, 
their inhibition zones are bigger than when the corresponding Ag-MOF 
is used individually. The uniqueness of our work may be summed up as 
the creation of inorganic-organic MOFs with high MG dye adsorption 
capabilities as well as antibacterial and fungal activities through syn-
thesis  using  a  one-pot,  environmentally  friendly  technique.  Ag-MOF 
effectively removes 809.713 mg/g of MG from water and has a surface 
area  of  676.06  m2/g.  Examine  how  temperature,  pH,  concentration, 
dose, and time affect the adsorption reaction, as well as how these fac-
tors  affect  the  thermodynamic  parameter.  This  will  help  you  confirm 
that  the  adsorption  reaction  was  endothermic  and  spontaneous.  This 
suggests that as the temperature rises, the rate of elimination increases. 
Investigation  into  the  mechanisms  of  adsorption  and  reaction  was 
extensive.  A  pseudo-second-order  kinetic  model  and  an  isothermal 
Langmuir model were used to simulate the adsorption process. These 
adsorbents can be reused up to five times and still have a removal effi-
ciency of 82.7 %, making them reusable as well. When the efficiency of 
MG  removal  from  earlier  study  was  examined,  it  was  found  that  our 
adsorbent outperformed the others. 

2. Materials and methods 

2.1. Materials and instruments 

The materials and instruments are given in the Support information. 

2.2. Synthesis of Ag-MOF nanoparticles 

The silver-based metal-organic frameworks were made by dissolving 
0.58 g of AgNO3 at 3 mL distilled water and 1.64 g of 2-methylimidazole 
in 25.0 mL of ammonium hydroxide, after complete desolvation mix the 
two  solutions  together  as  in  the  traditional  hydrothermal  synthesis 
method. This reaction mixture was heated at 100 
C in a Teflon auto-
◦
clave with a 100 mL wall for 24 h (5 
C/min heating rate). The substance 
was centrifuged, cooled, and then washed three times with deionized 
water before being dried for a whole night at 80 degrees Celsius. 

◦

2.3. Removal and batch studies of the Ag-MOF 

(cid:0) 4 to 2.2 × 10

To ascertain the ideal adsorption circumstances, MG stock solution 
was made. Utilizing the stock solution, the dye solution was produced at 
(cid:0) 3 mmol 
working concentrations ranging from 2.76 × 10
(cid:0) 1. Stock solutions were prepared with deionized water. Several batch 
L
adsorption tests were run in order to explore the adsorption capabilities 
of Ag-MOF for the elimination of MG dye. The necessary quantity of Ag- 
MOF adsorbent was added to aqueous solutions containing MG dye in a 
consistent  concentration. After  that,  the  mixture was  shaken  continu-
ously. After a predetermined amount of time, an aliquot of the solution 
was taken, centrifuged at 6000 rpm to extract it, and the supernatant 
was filtering out before being subjected to UV–vis spectroscopy analysis. 

ProcessSafetyandEnvironmentalProtection172(2023)395–407396