RESEARCH ARTICLE

www.advmat.de

Arming Ru with Oxygen-Vacancy-Enriched RuO2
Sub-Nanometer Skin Activates Superior Bifunctionality for
pH-Universal Overall Water Splitting

Yapeng Li, Wentao Wang, Mingyu Cheng, Yafei Feng, Xiao Han, Qizhu Qian, Yin Zhu,
and Genqiang Zhang*

Water electrolysis has been expected to assimilate the renewable yet
intermediate energy-derived electricity for green H2 production. However,
current benchmark anodic catalysts of Ir/Ru-based compounds suﬀer severely
from poor dissolution resistance. Herein, an eﬀective modiﬁcation strategy is
proposed by arming a sub-nanometer RuO2 skin with abundant oxygen
vacancies to the interconnected Ru clusters/carbon hybrid microsheet
(denoted as Ru@V-RuO2/C HMS), which can not only inherit the high
hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) activity of the Ru, but more importantly,
activate the superior activity toward the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in
both acid and alkaline conditions. Outstandingly, it can achieve an ultralow
overpotential of 176/201 mV for OER and 46/6 mV for the HER to reach 10 mA
cm−2 in acidic and alkaline solution, respectively. Inspiringly, the overall water
splitting can be driven with an ultrasmall cell voltage of 1.467/1.437 V for
10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 m H2SO4/1.0 m KOH, respectively. Density functional
theory calculations reveal that armoring the oxygen-vacancy-enriched RuO2
exoskeleton can cooperatively alter the interfacial electronic structure and
make the adsorption behavior of hydrogen and oxygen intermediates much
close to the ideal level, thus simultaneously speeding up the hydrogen
evolution kinetics and decreasing the energy barrier of oxygen release.

Y. Li, M. Cheng, Y. Feng, Q. Qian, Y. Zhu, G. Zhang
Hefei National Research Center for Physical Sciences at the Microscale
CAS Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei, Anhui 230026, P. R. China
E-mail: gqzhangmse@ustc.edu.cn
W. Wang
Guizhou Provincial Key Laboratory of Computational Nano-Material
Science
Guizhou Education University
Guiyang 550018, P. R. China
X. Han
Center of Advanced Nanocatalysis (CAN)
Department of Applied Chemistry
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei, Anhui 230026, P. R. China

The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202206351

DOI: 10.1002/adma.202206351

1. Introduction

The goal of CO2 neutralization leverages the
exploitation of renewable energy,[1] while
water electrolysis has been expected as a
promising manner to store the clean but
intermittent electricity from wind, solar,
tide, and so on, into the chemical bond,
thus could meet the diverse applications
in the future H2 economy.[2,3] However,
the core electrocatalysts are still unsophis-
ticated, which is mainly hindered by the
kinetics-sluggish oxygen evolution reaction
(OER) on the anode side.[4–6]

Although the earth-abundant, ﬁrst row
(3d) transition metal (oxy)hydroxides, and
metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have
garnered intense interest
for their en-
couraging activity, such as FeNi-LDH,[7]
FeCoW oxyhydroxide,[8] (Ni2Co1)0.925Fe0.075-
MOF-NF,[9]
the active dissolvability and
degradability in the acidic solution over-
shadow their competitiveness. On the
other hand, hydrogen evolution reaction
(HER) activity of
the state-of-the-art Pt
decreases to ≈2 to 3 orders of magnitude
in the alkaline media than that in the proton-rich environment
(only needs (tens of) millivolts of overpotential to reach the cur-
rent density of 10 mA cm−2
geo).[10] These pH-sensitive catalysts
burden the integrated water electrolysis system, further stress-
ing the necessity of developing stable electrocatalysts in the pH-
universal condition.[11]

Metallic Ru-based compounds possess favorable binding en-
ergy with H, robust thermostability, good anticorrosion ability, as
well as cost eﬃciency (about 1/5 price of Pt), thus have recently
gained ever-increasing interest as pH-universal electrocatalysts
for HER.[12] For example, Ru nanoparticles dispersed in nitro-
genated holey 2D carbon structure (Ru@C2N) exhibit outstand-
ing activity (13.5/17 mV@10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 m H2SO4/1.0 m
KOH) for HER.[13] Ideally, it is highly desired if functionaliza-
tion can be exerted to endow Ru with promising catalytic activity
for OER while simultaneously inheriting its HER capacity, which
could be a kind of superior candidates for overall water splitting
catalysts. Constructing core/shell conﬁguration has been demon-
strated as a powerful tactic, which can incorporate the strain and
ligand eﬀect to steer its adsorption/desorption kinetics with the

Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2206351

2206351 (1 of 10)

© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com

www.advmat.de

intermediates for optimizing the activity.[14,15] For example, Qiao
et al. have successfully armed the Ru core with the acid/alkaline-
stable IrOx skin (Ru@IrOx), the charge redistribution and strain
eﬀect induced by the highly strained ruthenium core and the
partially oxidized iridium shell across the metal-metal oxide het-
erojunction enhance the OER activity (𝜂
10 = 282 mV) and stabil-
ity (90% retentivity@24 h).[16] However, the interfacial electronic
redistribution and strain eﬀect activated by the core–shell het-
erostructure are short-range,[17] which means the sub-nanometer
skin with several atomic layers is essential to exert the syner-
getic eﬀect, thus imposing stringent constraints on the delicate
assembly of the ultrathin armor via facile yet better methods. Be-
sides, digging out the water electrolysis potentiality of the Ru-
based materials as much as possible, especially improving its us-
ability and buﬀering capacity in the pH-wide range is of much
necessary to increase the material’s survivability in the practical
working conditions.

Herein, we present a functionalization strategy by arming
Ru nanoclusters with sub-nanometer RuO2 skin enriched with
oxygen vacancy (Ov), that can activate the superior OER cat-
alytic activity, and simultaneously inherit the HER performance,
thus achieving the impressive catalytic activity with the ultra-
small overpotentials of 176 and 201 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for
OER in acidic and alkaline solution, also possessing the supe-
rior HER performance (47 mV@10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 m H2SO4;
6 mV@10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 m KOH). Theoretical calculation dis-
closes that strengthening the Ru with Ov enriched RuO2 can op-
timize the electronic structure to make a more thermoneutral H
adsorption/desorption for HER and reduce the energy barrier to-
ward OER. Therefore, the Ru@V-RuO2/C HMS integrates and
enlarges the respective advantages of the HER/OER active com-
ponents for expressing the extraordinary bifunctionality toward
water electrolysis, which only needs the low working voltage of
1.467/1.437 V in 0.5 m H2SO4/1.0 m KOH to reach 10 mA cm−2,
consequently realizing the obvious H2 generation driving by one
AA battery.

2. Results and Discussion

The synthetic procedures are cost-eﬀective and scalable, as illus-
trated in Figure 1a, including the formation of Ru/C hybrid mi-
crosheet via thermal annealing of Ru3+-melamine precursor in
inert gas, followed by covering Ov enriched RuO2 sub-nanometer
skin on Ru surface to obtain the ﬁnal product. Speciﬁcally, the
precursor of Ru3+-melamine (Figure S1, Supporting Informa-
tion) can be formed via the electrostatic interaction between the
N atom in the melamine molecule and the Ru3+ ion. Then,
the carbothermal reduction forms the carbon-based hybrid mi-
crosheet decorated with the dense Ru nanoclusters (denoted as
Ru/C HMS, Figure S2, Supporting Information ) owing to the
“self-templating” of melamine crystal.[18] Then, low-temperature
oxidation in the air can skillfully arm the sub-nanometer skin of
RuO2 for the Ru core. The morphology (Figure 1b and Figure S3,
Supporting Information ) of the ﬁnal product inherits the orig-
inal sheet-like morphology decorated with lots of tiny nanoclus-
ters. The enlarged transmission electron microscopy (TEM) im-
age (Figure 1c) displays that uniform clusters centered at 4.9 nm
(Figure S4, Supporting Information ) distribute on the matrix or-
derly, which balances the high density and good dispersion. Be-

sides, the X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) pattern (Upper in Figure 1d)
reﬂects the existence of RuO2 (PDF#43-1027) and Ru (PDF#70-
0274). The Raman spectrum (Bottom in Figure 1d) contains the
classical signals of the D band and G band, supporting the con-
servation of carbon. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analy-
sis suggests the surface area of this microsheet is as high as 193
m2 g−1, along with a large number of mesopores concentered
at 3 nm (Figure S5, Supporting Information ), which is easier
for the free diﬀusion of oxygen and hydrogen gas molecules.[19]
The aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-ﬁeld scanning
transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image in Fig-
ure 1e presents that the core–shell clusters widely exist in the
porous microsheet. Some nanopores are visual from the mi-
crosheet, coinciding with the BET result. Notably, the existence
of graphitic carbon marked with the yellow arrow in Figure 1f
and Figure S6, Supporting Information supports the above Ra-
man analysis, which may serve as the electron reservoir for pro-
viding electrons to the Ru-based constitute, thus can intensify its
anticorrosion ability and relieves its overoxidation for improving
the stability.[20] Its role in the hybrid will be discussed later. The
aberration corrected HAADF-STEM analysis portrayed in Fig-
ure 1g display a clear core–shell nanostructure with the diﬀerent
Z-contrast. To know the precise composition of the core–shell
nanostructure, two diﬀerent regions containing core and shell
were analyzed in detail. As shown in Figure 1h,i, the inner core
with the interplanar distances (d-space) of 2.17 and 2.08 Å can
be indexed as the (002) and (101) planes of hexagonal Ru phase,
while the outer shell with the d-space of 3.15 and 2.50 Å belong
to the (110) and (101) planes of tetragonal RuO2 phase, demon-
strating that the inner core of Ru has been clothed with several
atomic layers RuO2 shell. The sub-nanometer skin can not only
protect the Ru core for avoiding overoxidation but also change
the interface strain and receive the electronic regulation from the
inner core to boost the reactivities eﬃciently. Strikingly, the in-
versed fast Fourier transform images (Figures S7, Supporting In-
formation) present the distorted atomic arrangement in the inner
core and the broken atomic arrangement integrity in the outer
shell, implying the possible existence of strain eﬀect at the core–
shell interface.[21,22] This phenomenon widely exists in this kind
of core–shell structure (Figure S8, Supporting Information). Vi-
sually, the geometric phase analysis (GPA) showcases the asym-
metrical distribution of strains centered at the interface of the
Ru and RuO2 microregion (Figure 1j), indicating the existence
of the strong strain eﬀect in this core@shell heterostructure,
which may be beneﬁcial to optimize the kinetics and expose more
extra active sites.[23,24] Besides, the low-magniﬁcation HAADF-
STEM image and the corresponding elemental mapping results
(Figure S9, Supporting Information) portray the uniform pres-
ence of C, N, Ru, and O elements in this composite. Next, the
complexity and subtlety of arming the sub-nanometer skin for
the core to form the metal@metal oxide heterostructure have
been discerned carefully by altering the oxidation temperature.
At 150 °C, the oxygen almost cannot combine with Ru to form
the corresponding oxide (Figure S10, Supporting Information),
and the nanoparticles with nearly unchanged size disperse on
the mainland uniformly (Figure S11, Supporting Information).
At the higher temperature of 250 °C, only the cracked microsheet
decorated with slightly aggregated oxides can be obtained. Thus,
the temperature of 200 °C is critical to precisely arm the

Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2206351

2206351 (2 of 10)

© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH

 15214095, 2023, 24, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202206351 by University Of Adelaide, Wiley Online Library on [29/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License